_THE WORLD'S BEST POETRY_


    _I Home: Friendship
    II Love
   III Sorrow and Consolation
    IV The Higher Life
     V Nature
    VI Fancy: Sentiment
   VII Descriptive: Narrative
  VIII National Spirit
    IX Tragedy: Humor
     X Poetical Quotations_

THE WORLD'S BEST POETRY

IN TEN VOLUMES, ILLUSTRATED

Editor-in-Chief
BLISS CARMAN

Associate Editors
John Vance Cheney
Charles G.D. Roberts
Charles F. Richardson
Francis H. Stoddard

Managing Editor
John R. Howard


1904.


_The World's Best Poetry
Vol. VIII
NATIONAL SPIRIT_




THE STUDY OF POETRY.

BY FRANCIS HOVEY STODDARD.


Clever men of action, according to Bacon, despise studies, ignorant
men too much admire them, wise men make use of them. "Yet," he says,
"they teach not their own use, but that there is a wisdom without them
and above them won by observation." These are the words of a man who
had been taught by years of studiousness the emptiness of mere study.
It does not teach its own usefulness, and gives its most important
lesson if through it we learn that beyond lies a region from which may
come a truer wisdom won by observation. This, when all is said, is the
one great defect of any system of study, in that it teaches not its
own use. No amount of study of the principles of barter will make a
man a great merchant. One can study painting and learn all the
characteristics and methods and schools of the art and yet not be able
to paint a picture. No amount of study of poetry will make a man a
poet. So the crafty men of action "contemn studies," and the wise men
who use them look beyond them for their value. "English literature,"
said a noted professor not long ago, "cannot be taught"; and certain
it is that even with the most advanced analytical text-book one cannot
get a final satisfaction from "doing a sum" in English literature as
one would work a problem in arithmetic. When applied to the higher
arts, study, deep and true as one can make it, leaves one the surer
that there is a wisdom beyond, which cometh not by study alone.

Least of all can the deepest things in poetry be learned by mere
study. Poetry deals with feeling, which study excludes. Study, indeed,
seems to belong exclusively to the prose habit; it seems to be of the
intellect and not of the emotions; to be of the mind and not of the
spirit. We cannot write a text-book in poetry, nor can we ever in a
text-book written in prose put all the secret of poetry. Beyond the
text-book always lies the higher wisdom born of that which Bacon
called observation, which most of us now call insight, that immediate
apprehension of the highest relations which comes as a revelation in
our inspired moments.

In spite of all this the study of poetry has an important function,
and it is the purpose of this article to show how to use it most
effectively. Poetry is one of the most difficult of all arts to study,
so difficult that it has had few text-books and no complete
exposition. The inquirer searching for help will find only a few
hand-books, the most useful of which are these: Gummere: "Beginnings
of Poetry" and "Hand-book of Poetry"; Schipper: "Metrik"; Lanier:
"Science of English Verse"; Guest: "English Rhythms"; Stedman: "The
Nature and Elements of Poetry." Excellent as these are, he may lament
when he has read them that he has found the history of poetic forms,
and the technique of poetic method, where he hoped to find the secret
of poetry. He will be likely to get as much help from writings on
poetry that are not text-books, such as Matthew Arnold's Essays: "On
Translating Homer," "Last Words on Translating Homer," "Celtic
Poetry," "Introduction to the Poetry of Wordsworth," and the
"Introduction to Humphry Ward's English Poets"; Emerson's Essays: "The
Poet" and "Poetry and Imagination"; Wordsworth's Introduction to the
"Lyrical Ballads"; Poe's striking little essays on the art of poetry;
Aristotle's "Rhetoric"; Macaulay's "Essay on Milton"; Lowell's "Essay
on Dryden"; and many a passage of illuminative comment from Milton,
from Pope, from Dryden, from Coleridge and from many another. For one
who has not known and read much poetry the best introduction to its
study may well be the pleasurable reading of some, or of all, of these
works, though remembering that such reading is not study, but only the
reviewing of records of work done by others, useful mainly as a
preparation for the real study which is to follow.

From all these works the student will not be likely to get a
definition of poetry which will satisfy him. One may say indeed with
truth that poetry is such expression as parallels the real and the
ideal by means of some rhythmic form. But this is not a complete
definition. Poetry is not to be bounded with a measuring line or
sounded with a plummet. The student must feel after its limits as
these authors have done, and find for himself its satisfactions. One
can feel more of its power than the mind can define; for definitions
are prose-forms of mind action, while poetry in its higher
manifestations is pure emotion, outpassing prose limits. Yet one can
know poetry if he cannot completely define it. The one essential
element which distinguishes it from prose is rhythm. In its primal
expressions this is mainly a rhythm of stresses and sounds--of accents
and measures, of alliterations and rhymes. Poetry began when man,
swaying his body, first sang or moaned to give expression to his joy
or sorrow. Its earliest forms are the songs which accompany the
simplest emotions. When rowers were in a boat the swinging oars became
rhythmic, and the oarsman's chant naturally followed. When the savage
overcame his enemy, he danced his war dance, and sang his war song
around his campfire at night, tone and words and gestures all fitting
into harmony with the movement of his body. So came the chants and
songs of work and of triumph. For the dead warrior the moan of
lamentation fitted itself to the slower moving to and fro of the
mourner, and hence came the elegy. In its first expression this was
but inarticulate, half action, half music, dumbly voicing the emotion
through the senses; its rhythms were all for the ear and it had little
meaning beyond the crude representation of some simple human desire
and grief.

It became poetry when it put a thrill of exultation in work, of
delight in victory, or of grief at loss by death, into some rhythmic
form tangible to the senses. There grew up thereafter a body of
rhythmic forms--lines, stanzas, accents, rhythms, verbal harmonies.
These forms are the outward dress of poetry, and may rightly be the
first subject of the student's study. We properly give the name of
poetry to verses such as Southey's "Lodore," Poe's "Bells," or
Lanier's "Song of the Chattahoochee," which do little more than sing
to our ears the harmonies of sound, the ultimate rhythms of nature.
Yet it is not merely the brook or the bell or the river, that we hear
in the poem, but the echoing of that large harmony of nature of which
the sound of the brook or the bell is only the single strain. Through
the particular it suggests the universal, as does all poetry, leading
through nature up to something greater, far beyond. This rhythm is
best studied in poems that were written to be sung or chanted. If one
could read Greek, or Anglo-Saxon, or Old High German, or the English
of Chaucer's day, he could quickly train his ear to be independent of
the hand-books on versification, by reading aloud, or listening as one
read aloud, the "Odyssey" or the "Beowulf," or the "Nibelungen Lied"
or the "Canterbury Tales." These would be better for this purpose than
any modern verses, for the reason that they were intended to be sung
or chanted, and so all the rhythms are real to the senses. Since the
barrier of language bars out for most of us this older verse, we can
read the early ballads, the lyrics of the Elizabethan time, when as
yet verses spoke mainly to the ear, or some modern poems of the
simpler type, such as "Evangeline" or "Hiawatha."

Such poetry, which is mainly to delight and charm the ear, is really a
primal form of verse and we may properly call it the poetry of the
Senses. In studying it Lanier's "Science of English Verse" is a
delightful companion, and many minor hand-books besides those named
above, such as are found in most schools, and some of the shorter
accounts of versification such as are found in works on rhetoric, will
give assistance.

Yet the pathway to the mastery of the problems of metre is for each
student to tread alone. The best plan is to read aloud a considerable
quantity. Then the technical language of the books will lose its
terrors and the simplicity of construction of good poetry will become
apparent. If the student will read so much of this poetry that his
senses become responsive to its music, he will no longer need a
hand-book. For this purpose let him read such poems as can be sung,
chanted, or spoken to the ear; such as Macaulay's "Lays of Ancient
Rome," Scott's "Marmion," Browning's "Pied Piper" and "How They
Brought the Good News," Tennyson's "Charge of the Light Brigade." Let
him read mainly for the senses rather than for the mind, getting the
reward in the quickening of life through the throbbing rhythms; then
the metrical system of poetry will become as real to him as the
rhythmic movements of the planets are to an astronomer. There is no
other way to get a feeling for the pulsations of poetry than through
this intimate acquaintance. Without this, months of reading of
amphibrachs and trochees and dactyls will not avail. It should be read
aloud as much as possible to make the swing of its verses perfectly
clear. When it sings to us as we read, it has begun to teach the
message of its rhythms.

Thus far the text-books have been pleasant companions, even when
unable to give as much aid to the student as he could wish; but the
fact will come to him at length that there is something more in poetry
than the hand-books permit him to consider. These books deal with the
forms, and most of them with the forms only. They analyze the methods,
work out the metre, show how the parts are woven together, explain how
the chords produce the harmonies. But just in proportion as the
student becomes learned in these rhythms, and can distinguish minute
or subtle variations of metrical structure, does he realize that this
study teaches not its own use and that there is something beyond which
must be won by his own observation. He finds in his search for
rhythmical perfection that there are poems which make little appeal to
his senses, whose lines do not sing themselves through his day-dreams,
which yet affect his imagination even more powerfully than the musical
strains thrilled his senses. He finds that there is much more in
poetry than its rhymes and jingles, that there is a rhythm greater
than that of the senses. In its more complex forms poetry is rhythm of
thought, leading the mind to find relations which prose may describe,
but which poetry alone can recreate. There is such a thing as a prose
thought and such a thing as a poetic thought. The one gives with
exactness the fact as it exists, clearly, honestly, directly, and for
all completed and tangible things is the natural medium of expression.
The other parallels the actual with a suggestion of an ideal
rhythmically consonant with the motive underlying the fact. Justice,
for example, deals in prose fashion with a crime and awards the
punishment which the law allows; poetic justice suggests such
recompense as would come of itself in a community perfectly organized.
The prose of life is honest living, a worthy endeavor to do the best
one can in the world as it is; the poetry of life is the feeling for,
and the striving after, the bringing of this life into harmony with a
nobler living. So we rightly give the name of poetry to such verse as
Goldsmith's "Deserted Village," Johnson's "London," Gray's "Elegy,"
Wordsworth's "Excursion," Milton's "Paradise Lost," Chaucer's
"Knight's Tale," Browning's "King and the Book," Tennyson's "In
Memoriam," which do not much stir our senses. They parallel the real
with the ideal, suggesting the eternal rhythms of infinite mind as the
poetry of the senses suggests the eternal rhythms of omnipotent
nature.

This poetry of the Intellect is the second great division of the
poetic realm. Beyond it lies still another; for there are spiritual
harmonies which the mind alone cannot compass, and which the senses
alone cannot interpret. The hand-books know little of spiritual
harmonies, and do not go beyond their academic classifications of
lyric and epic, and their catalogues of pentameters, hexameters, or
alexandrines. But the student can for himself push his observation
beyond, and come to the poetry of the higher imagination, where he can
be forgetful of the mere form and disdainful of the merely logical
relations, where his spirit can as it were see face to face the truth
beyond the seeming. This is the poetry of the spirit, and ought to
come as a revelation to the searcher. He may first find it in some
pure lyric such as Shelley's "Skylark," or in some mystical fantasy
such as Moore's "Lallah Rookh" or Coleridge's "Christabel," or in some
story of human abnegation such as Tennyson's "Enoch Arden," or some
wail of a soul in pain, as in Shelley's "Adonais," or in some outburst
of exultant grief such as Whitman's "Captain, My Captain," or in some
revelation of the unseen potencies close about us, as in Browning's
"Saul," or in some vision of the mystery of this our earthly struggle
such as "Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came," or in some answer of
the spirit to a never stilled question such as Wordsworth's "Ode:
Intimations of Immortality." When he thus finds it he has come to
poetry in its highest use. In his "Alexander's Feast" Dryden hints at
two great functions of poetry in the lines:

  "He raised a mortal to the skies,
  She drew an angel down."

The office of poetry is to parallel the actual with the ideal, to cast
upon an earthly landscape something of a heavenly glow, to interpret
earthly things in terms of the spirit. The poetry of the Senses lifts
a mortal to the skies, thinking the thought of one higher than itself
as the poet muses, singing the songs of an angelic choir in harmony
with the rhythm of the verse. The poetry of the Spirit brings the
message of the angels down to men and makes the harmonies they speak
the music of this earthly life.

The highest type of poetry lends itself perfectly to earnest and
profound study. In class work it is usually better to study poets as
well as poems, and to study thoroughly a few works of a great master.
Poetry is essentially a synthetic art; it unites the wandering desires
of our hearts and spirits to make one single and enduring impression.
Poetry speaks also the mood, the aspiration, and the deepest intent of
its author; so that the great poet is the one who brings us most
directly to understand its art. For most student classes it is best to
take a single poet for interpretation, and to study in succession a
small number--say six to ten--of his works, making one, or at least
two or three, the subject of the conferences for each week. The choice
of author will be dependent on many considerations and cannot here be
positively advised, but one will not go astray in choosing Wordsworth,
Tennyson, Browning, Longfellow, or Whittier, or three of them, for a
season's work. Intelligent direction is of great assistance in making
the study definite and progressive. Choose first of all the poems
which seem to have influenced men, for to move men is the final test
of poetry. If there is no class, and no leader, let the student make
his choice by a preliminary examination. Let him read rapidly, and for
the single impression, the poems of Wordsworth whose titles seem most
familiar to him as he scans them over; such as "Tintern Abbey,"
"Yarrow Unvisited," "Solitary Reaper," "Lucy," "We are Seven," "The
Intimations of Immortality," "She was a Phantom of Delight," and a few
of the lyrical ballads; then let him read Tennyson's "Locksley Hall,"
"Maud," "The Idylls of the King," and a few of the shorter poems; let
him read Browning's "Saul," "Abt Vogler," "The Grammarian's Funeral,"
"Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came," "Pippa Passes," one or two
dramas, and a few of the brief poems in the volume "Men and Women."
Then let him make his own list for study, taking those poems which
have most stirred him, those which he remembers vividly after his
reading, those which have become a part of himself. If the student
makes his choice frankly and sincerely, he has, in making it, begun
his study. Then let him frame for himself or get from his leader, if
he has one, a list of the questions which each poem is to answer for
him. If the work be really poetry, its study ought to give a help
toward the solution of the first great problems: "What is poetry?" and
"What is its revelation to the life of our senses, our hearts, and our
souls?" We have a right to ask of each poem three questions: "How does
it charm our senses?"; "How does it make the meaning of things clearer
for us?"; "How does it bring to us a renewal of life?" The first
question is better fitted for private study than for class
investigation, the senses being delicate organs and shy in company.
Let the minute matters of form and structure be gone over at home. Let
the student work out the metre, the typical line, and the variations
by which the poet gets his effects, the metaphors, the alliterations,
the consonant and vowel harmonies. It will aid if this work be made as
definite and as exact as an investigation in a scientific laboratory.
But all this should be the student's home work. In the class the large
divisions of the poem should be sympathetically shown, so that each
student will comprehend the poem as a whole as the poet must have
conceived it. Then as some one reads aloud the lines the music of the
rhythms will come by assimilation rather than by analysis. Poetry
parallels the real with the ideal to make a harmony before undreamed
of. So in the lines sound re-echoes sound, and a subtle music but half
perceived sings itself out of the moving notes.

What burden this music bears is the second question. Poetry differs
from prose in that it lifts the thought so that its highest relations
and suggestions are made known. We have a right therefore to parallel
the prose sight with the poetic visions and to find in what the one
transcends the other. If we are studying the "Idylls of the King," for
instance, we may fitly ask what was the story as the poet took it, and
into what has he transformed it for us. This study of the thought of
the poem is an excellent subject for class work. The questions should
be made definite and so grouped that sections of the class can choose
one or another phase of the problem; the conferences should be so
directed that a few clearly worked-out and thoroughly unified poetic
thoughts will be left in the mind of each student.

In all things practice may fitly supplement precept. In a reading
circle of which one of the editors of this series was a member the
poems of Tennyson were studied by a method closely resembling that
advocated in this article. As a suggestion the topics and questions
for one of the poems are here given. One of the members acted as
leader. A brief essay reciting the history of the poem was read. The
entire poem was read aloud by one of the members of the class. Then
the topics given below were discussed as presented in turn by groups
of students who had given especial attention to one of the topics. In
the discussions the entire class joined, and at the close a very brief
summing up by the leader gathered up the threads of thought.

Topic: "Locksley Hall" and "Locksley Hall Sixty Years After."

Required Readings: "Locksley Hall"; "Locksley Hall Sixty Years After";
"Lady Clara Vere de Vere"; "Sir Galahad."

Suggested Readings: In connection with the earlier poem, "Ulysses" and
"The Two Voices"; in connection with the later poem, "Maud," "Memoir
of Tennyson," by Lord Hallam Tennyson.

Suggestions for Study: (A) The physical basis of the poem.

Study the metre. Why called Trochaic Octameter? In what way does this
metre resemble and in what way differ from Lowell's "Present Crisis,"
Swinburne's "Triumph of Time," Browning's "There 's a woman like a
dewdrop" (from "The Blot i' the Scutcheon"), and Mrs. Browning's
"Rhyme of the Duchess May"? Why is this metre peculiarly adapted to
the sentiment of "Locksley Hall"? How does the metre differ in effect
from that of Mrs. Julia Ward Howe's "Battle Hymn of the Republic" and
Bryant's "The Death of the Flowers" and Tennyson's "May Queen"? Is the
effect of the rhythm optimistic as opposed to the pessimism of the
"Triumph of Time," and why? Why are the lines of this poem so easily
carried in the memory? What is there in the use of the words which
gives such sweetness to the verses as one reads them aloud. Has the
poem for you a music of its own which haunts you like a remembered
vision? Find out, if you can, something of the secret of this music.

(B) The intellectual interest of the poem.

(1) Consider the meaning of difficult passages, such as "Fairy tales
of science." Explain the meaning of stanzas containing the following
quotations: "Smote the chord of self"; "Cursed be social wants"; "That
a sorrow's crown of sorrow"; "But the jingling of the guinea"; "Slowly
comes a hungry people"; "Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers."

(2) How long an interval elapsed between the writing of the above two
poems? Does any change in style or trend of thought indicate the lapse
of time? The earlier poem was and is immensely popular. Why? Why is
the later one less popular?

(3) What is the story in the poem, and in what manner is it told? How
is the story continued in "Sixty Years After"? Was Locksley Hall an
inland or a seashore residence, and why? Describe the surroundings
from suggestions in the poems. Sum up what the hero tells of himself
and his love-story. What suggestions are there regarding the
characters of Amy and Edith? Is the emotional side of the hero as
finely balanced as the intellectual side? What light is thrown on the
character of his love by his outbursts against Amy? Would it be fair
to judge of Amy and her husband by what he says of them in his first
anguish? Does he ever admit that he judged them harshly? If so, do you
agree with him altogether? Was it well for Amy to marry as she did?
When obedience to parental wishes and love are in conflict, which
should be followed? Did the hero's evil prophecies come true? Whose
love do you think was the greatest, Amy's, or his, or the Squire's?

(4) How does Tennyson all through the poem make it a parable of human
life?

(C) The emotional influence of the poem. How has this poem influenced
you? For many persons, Tennyson, out of a simple love-story, has made
a prophecy of ideal love. Has he for you? For many persons Tennyson
made poetry out of this simple story when he paralleled the tale of
earthly passion with a vision of completer life, so vivid that the
pain and tragedy of this present life come to be for us but the
preparation for the better life to come, as the poet sings to us that
"Through the ages one increasing purpose runs And the thoughts of men
are widened with the process of the suns."

Has he to you in like manner through his poem given a truer conception
of the nature and use of poetry?

Systematic study such as that suggested above will help in answering
the questions, "What charm has this poem for us?" and "How does it put
a deeper meaning into the events it records?" But it is difficult to
frame formal questions the answers to which will show how a poem
quickens life. The influence of a poem is so much a matter of
temperament and of emotion, both of the author and of the reader, that
one has to feel its power rather than to work it out logically. Poetry
passes beyond prose in that it quickens life by moving us to feel its
nobler emotions. It will teach its own lesson to the appreciative
reader, and the student who gets fully into sympathy with a great poem
will have his whole life made brighter. Class work, done
sympathetically and sincerely, will aid in finding the truest
interpretations. Yet studies teach not their own use. The higher
blessings come to us unbidden if we as little children hope for them.
We shall find the highest uses of poetry in remembering always that it
may at its best come to us as an


                             "Angel of light
  Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night."


[Signature: Francis Hovey Stoddard]




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


  INTRODUCTORY ESSAY:
    "THE STUDY OF POETRY."
    By _Francis Hovey Stoddard_

  POEMS OF NATIONAL SPIRIT:
    PATRIOTISM
    FREEDOM
    WAR
    PEACE

  INDEX: AUTHORS AND TITLES




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


  JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER
    _Photogravure from a life-photograph by Notman, Boston_.

  QUEEN ELIZABETH KNIGHTING FRANCIS DRAKE
    "When our Drake has the luck to make their pride duck.
      And stoop to the lads of the Island!"

    _From engraving after the drawing by Sir John Gilbert, R.A_.

  WILLIAM WATSON
    _After a life-photograph by Elliott and Fry, London_.

  SAMUEL FRANCIS SMITH
    _After a life-photograph by Notman, Boston_.

  THOMAS CAMPBELL
    _From an engraving after the portrait by James Lonsdale._

  WILLIAM COWPER
    _From an engraving_.

  THE AUTHOR'S FIRST SINGING OF THE MARSEILLAISE
    "To arms! to arms! ye brave!
    The avenging sword unsheathe."

    _From a photogravure after the painting by J.A.A. Pils_.

  A CAVALRY CHARGE
    "My darling! ah, the glass is out!
    The bullets ring, the riders shout--
      No time for wine or sighing!
    There! bring my love the shattered glass--
    Charge! On the foe! No joys surpass
            Such dying!"

    _From photogravure by Goupil, after a painting
    by Edouard Detaille_.

  NATHAN HALE
    "'Neath the blue morn, the sunny morn,
      He dies upon the tree,
    And he mourns that he can lose
      But one life for liberty."

    _From photograph of the Statue by Frederick
    Macmonnies, in New York City Hall Park_.

  EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN
    _After a photograph from life_.

  THOMAS BUCHANAN READ
    _After a photograph from life_.




POEMS OF NATIONAL SPIRIT.

       *       *       *       *       *

I.

PATRIOTISM.


       *       *       *       *       *




WHAT CONSTITUTES A STATE?

      What constitutes a state?
  Not high-raised battlement or labored mound,
      Thick wall or moated gate;
  Not cities proud with spires and turrets crowned;
      Not bays and broad-armed ports,
  Where, laughing at the storm, rich navies ride;
      Not starred and spangled courts,
  Where low-browed baseness wafts perfume to pride.
      No:--men, high-minded men,
  With powers as far above dull brutes endued
      In forest, brake, or den,
  As beasts excel cold rocks and brambles rude,--
      Men who their duties know,
  But know their rights, and, knowing, dare maintain,
      Prevent the long-aimed blow,
  And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain;
      These constitute a State;
  And sovereign law, that State's collected will,
    O'er thrones and globes elate
  Sits empress, crowning good, repressing ill.
    Smit by her sacred frown,
  The fiend, Dissension, like a vapor sinks;
    And e'en the all-dazzling crown
  Hides his faint rays, and at her bidding shrinks.
    Such was this heaven-loved isle,
  Than Lesbos fairer and the Cretan shore!
    No more shall freedom smile?
  Shall Britons languish, and be men no more?
    Since all must life resign,
  Those sweet rewards which decorate the brave
    'Tis folly to decline,
  And steal inglorious to the silent grave.

SIR WILLIAM JONES.

       *       *       *       *       *




BREATHES THERE THE MAN?

FROM "THE LAY OF THE LAST MINSTREL," CANTO VI.


  Breathes there the man with soul so dead
  Who never to himself hath said,
    This is my own, my native land!
  Whose heart has ne'er within him burned,
  As home his footsteps he hath turned
    From wandering on a foreign strand?
  If such there breathe, go, mark him well;
  For him no minstrel raptures swell;
  High though his titles, proud his name,
  Boundless his wealth as wish can claim,
  Despite those titles, power, and pelf,
  The wretch, concentred all in self,
  Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
  And, doubly dying, shall go down
  To the vile dust from whence he sprung,
  Unwept, unhonored, and unsung.

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




MY COUNTRY.


  There is a land, of every land the pride,
  Beloved by Heaven o'er all the world beside,
  Where brighter suns dispense serener light,
  And milder moons imparadise the night;
  A land of beauty, virtue, valor, truth,
  Time-tutored age, and love-exalted youth:
  The wandering mariner, whose eye explores
  The wealthiest isles, the most enchanting shores,
  Views not a realm so bountiful and fair,
  Nor breathes the spirit of a purer air.
  In every clime, the magnet of his soul,
  Touched by remembrance, trembles to that pole;
  For in this land of Heaven's peculiar race,
  The heritage of nature's noblest grace,
  There is a spot of earth supremely blest,
  A dearer, sweeter spot than all the rest,
  Where man, creation's tyrant, casts aside
  His sword and sceptre, pageantry and pride,
  While in his softened looks benignly blend
  The sire, the son, the husband, brother, friend.
  Here woman reigns; the mother, daughter, wife,
  Strew with fresh flowers the narrow way of life:
  In the clear heaven of her delightful eye
  An angel-guard of love and graces lie;
  Around her knees domestic duties meet,
  And fireside pleasures gambol at her feet.
  "Where shall that land, that spot of earth be found?"
  Art thou a man?--a patriot?--look around;
  O, thou shalt find, howe'er thy footsteps roam,
  That land _thy_ country, and that spot _thy_ home!

  Man, through all ages of revolving time,
  Unchanging man, in every varying clime,
  Deems his own land of every land the pride,
  Beloved by Heaven o'er the world beside;
  His home the spot of earth supremely blest,
  A dearer, sweeter spot than all the rest.

JAMES MONTGOMERY.

       *       *       *       *       *




FATHER AND MOTHER TONGUE.


  Our Father Land! and wouldst thou know
    Why we should call it Father Land?
  It is that Adam here below
    Was made of earth by Nature's hand;
  And he our father, made of earth,
    Hath peopled earth on every hand;
  And we, in memory of his birth,
    Do call our country Father Land.

  At first, in Eden's bowers, they say,
    No sound of speech had Adam caught,
  But whistled like a bird all day,--
    And maybe 'twas for want of thought:
  But Nature, with resistless laws,
    Made Adam soon surpass the birds;
  She gave him lovely Eve because
    If he'd a wife they must _have words_.

  And so the native land, I hold,
    By male descent is proudly mine;
  The language, as the tale hath told,
    Was given in the female line.
  And thus we see on either hand
    We name our blessings whence they've sprung;
  We call our country Father Land,
    We call our language Mother Tongue.

SAMUEL LOVER.

       *       *       *       *       *




EAST, WEST, HOME'S BEST.

FROM "THE TRAVELLER."


  As some lone miser visiting his store,
  Bends at his treasure, counts, recounts it o'er;
  Hoards after hoards his rising raptures fill,
  Yet still he sighs, for hoards are wanting still:
  Thus to my breast alternate passions rise,
  Pleased with each good that heaven to man supplies:
  Yet oft a sigh prevails, and sorrows fall,
  To see the sum of human bliss so small;
  And oft I wish, amidst the scene to find
  Some spot to real happiness consigned,
  Where my worn soul, each wandering hope at rest,
  May gather bliss to see my fellows blest.
  But where to find that happiest spot below,
  Who can direct, when all pretend to know?
  The shuddering tenant of the frigid zone
  Boldly proclaims that happiest spot his own,
  Extols the treasures of his stormy seas,
  And his long nights of revelry and ease;
  The naked negro, planting at the line,
  Boasts of his golden sands and palmy wine,
  Basks in the glare, or stems the tepid wave,
  And thanks his gods for all the good they gave.
  Such is the patriot's boast where'er we roam,
  His first, best country, ever is at home.
  And yet, perhaps, if countries we compare,
  And estimate the blessings which they share,
  Though patriots flatter, still shall wisdom find
  An equal portion dealt to all mankind,
  As different good, by art or nature given,
  To different nations, makes their blessings even.

OLIVER GOLDSMITH.

       *       *       *       *       *




GIFTS.


  "O World-God, give me Wealth!" the Egyptian cried.
  His prayer was granted. High as heaven behold
  Palace and Pyramid; the brimming tide
  Of lavish Nile washed all his land with gold.
  Armies of slaves toiled ant-wise at his feet,
  World-circling traffic roared through mart and street,
  His priests were gods, his spice-balmed kings enshrined
  Set death at naught in rock-ribbed charnels deep.
  Seek Pharaoh's race to-day, and ye shall find
  Rust and the moth, silence and dusty sleep.

  "O World-God, give me Beauty!" cried the Greek.
  His prayer was granted. All the earth became
  Plastic and vocal to his sense; each peak,
  Each grove, each stream, quick with Promethean flame,
  Peopled the world with imaged grace and light.
  The lyre was his, and his the breathing might
  Of the immortal marble, his the play
  Of diamond-pointed thought and golden tongue.
  Go seek the sunshine race. Ye find to-day
  A broken column and a lute unstrung.

  "O World-God, give me Power!" the Roman cried.
  His prayer was granted. The vast world was chained
  A captive to the chariot of his pride,
  The blood of myriad provinces was drained
  To feed that fierce, insatiable red heart--
  Invulnerably bulwarked every part
  With serried legions and with close-meshed Code.
  Within, the burrowing worm had gnawed its home:
  A roofless ruin stands where once abode
  The imperial race of everlasting Rome.

  "O God-head, give me Truth!" the Hebrew cried.
  His prayer was granted. He became the slave
  Of the Idea, a pilgrim far and wide,
  Cursed, hated, spurned, and scourged with none to save.
  The Pharaohs knew him, and when Greece beheld,
  His wisdom wore the hoary crown of Eld.
  Beauty he hath forsworn, and wealth and power.
  Seek him to-day, and find in every land.
  No fire consumes him, neither floods devour;
  Immortal through the lamp within his hand.

EMMA LAZARUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




ENGLAND.

FROM "THE TIMEPIECE": "THE TASK," BK. II.


  England, with all thy faults, I love thee still,--
  My country! and, while yet a nook is left
  Where English minds and manners may be found,
  Shall be constrained to love thee. Though thy clime
  Be fickle, and thy year most part deformed
  With dripping rains, or withered by a frost,
  I would not yet exchange thy sullen skies,
  And fields without a flower, for warmer France
  With all her vines; nor for Ausonia's groves
  Of golden fruitage and her myrtle bowers.
  To shake thy senate, and from height sublime
  Of patriot eloquence to flash down fire
  Upon thy foes, was never meant my task:
  But I can feel thy fortunes, and partake
  Thy joys and sorrows with as true a heart
  As any thunderer there. And I can feel
  Thy follies too; and with a just disdain
  Frown at effeminates whose very looks
  Reflect dishonor on the land I love.
  How, in the name of soldiership and sense,
  Should England prosper, when such things, as smooth
  And tender as a girl, all essenced o'er
  With odors, and as profligate as sweet,
  Who sell their laurel for a myrtle wreath,
  And love when they should fight,--when such as these
  Presume to lay their hand upon the ark
  Of her magnificent and awful cause?
  Time was when it was praise and boast enough
  In every clime, and travel where we might,
  That we were born her children. Praise enough
  To fill the ambition of a private man,
  That Chatham's language was his mother tongue,
  And Wolfe's great name compatriot with his own.

WILLIAM COWPER.

       *       *       *       *       *




RULE, BRITANNIA.

FROM "ALFRED," ACT II. SC. 5.


  When Britain first, at Heaven's command,
    Arose from out the azure main,
  This was the charter of the land,
    And guardian angels sung the strain:
      _Rule, Britannia, rule the waves!
      For Britons never will be slaves._

  The nations not so blest as thee
    Must in their turns to tyrants fall;
  Whilst thou shalt flourish, great and free,
    The dread and envy of them all.
      _Rule, Britannia!_ etc.

  Still more majestic shalt thou rise,
    More dreadful from each foreign stroke;
  As the loud blasts that tear the skies
    Serve but to root thy native oak.
      _Rule, Britannia!_ etc.

  Thee haughty tyrants ne'er shall tame;
    All their attempts to bend thee down
  Will but arouse thy generous flame,
    And work their woe--but thy renown.
      _Rule, Britannia!_ etc.

  To thee belongs the rural reign;
    Thy cities shall with commerce shine;
  All thine shall be the subject main,
    And every shore it circles thine.
      _Rule, Britannia!_ etc.

  The Muses, still with Freedom found,
    Shall to thy happy coast repair;
  Blest Isle! with matchless beauty crowned,
    And manly hearts to guard the fair.
      _Rule, Britannia, rule the leaves!
      For Britons never will be slaves._

JAMES THOMSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BOWMAN'S SONG.

FROM "THE WHITE COMPANY."


      What of the bow?
    The bow was made in England:
  Of true wood, of yew wood,
    The wood of English bows;
      So men who are free
      Love the old yew-tree
  And the land where the yew-tree grows.

      What of the cord?
    The cord was made in England:
  A rough cord, a tough cord,
    A cord that bowmen love;
      So we'll drain our jacks
      To the English flax
  And the land where the hemp was wove.

      What of the shaft?
    The shaft was cut in England:
  A long shaft, a strong shaft,
    Barbed and trim and true;
      So we'll drink all together
      To the gray goose feather,
  And the land where the gray goose flew.

      What of the men?
    The men were bred in England:
  The bowman--the yeoman--
    The lads of dale and fell.
      Here's to you--and to you!
     To the hearts that are true
  And the land where the true hearts dwell.

SIR A. CONAN DOYLE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ROAST BEEF OF OLD ENGLAND.


  When mighty roast beef was the Englishman's food,
  It ennobled our hearts, and enriched our blood;
  Our soldiers were brave, and our courtiers were good.
        _O, the Roast Beef of old England,
        And O, the old English Roast Beef_!

  But since we have learned from effeminate France
  To eat their ragouts, as well as to dance,
  We are fed up with nothing but vain complaisance.
        _O, the Roast Beef_, etc.

HENRY FIELDING.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Our fathers of old were robust, stout, and strong,
  And kept open house with good cheer all day long,
  Which made their plump tenants rejoice in this song.
        _O, the Roast Beef_, etc.

  When good Queen Elizabeth sat on the throne,
  Ere coffee and tea, and such slip-slops, were known,
  The world was in terror, if e'en she did frown.
        _O, the Roast Beef_, etc.

  In those days, if fleets did presume on the main,
  They seldom or never returned back again;
  As witness the vaunting Armada of Spain.
        _O, the Roast Beef_, etc.

  O, then we had stomachs to eat and to fight,
  And when wrongs were cooking, to set ourselves right;
  But now we're--hum?--I could, but--good night;
        _O, the Roast Beef of old England,
           And O, the old English Roast Beef_!

_The last four stanzas added by_ RICHARD LOVERIDGE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SNUG LITTLE ISLAND.


  Daddy Neptune, one day, to Freedom did say,
    If ever I lived upon dry land,
  The spot I should hit on would be little Britain!
    Says Freedom, "Why, that's my own island!"
        O, it's a snug little island!
        A right little, tight little island!
      Search the globe round, none can be found
        So happy as this little island.

  Julius Caesar, the Roman, who yielded to no man,
    Came by water,--he couldn't come by land;
  And Dane, Pict, and Saxon, their homes turned their backs on,
    And all for the sake of our island.
        O, what a snug little island!
        They'd all have a touch at the island!
      Some were shot dead, some of them fled,
        And some stayed to live on the island.

  Then a very great war-man, called Billy the Norman,
    Cried, "Drat it, I never liked my land.
  It would be much more handy to leave this Normandy,
    And live on your beautiful island."
        Says he, "'Tis a snug little island;
        Sha'n't us go visit the island?"
      Hop, skip, and jump, there he was plump,
        And he kicked up a dust in the island.

  But party deceit helped the Normans to beat;
    Of traitors they managed to buy land;
  By Dane, Saxon, or Pict, Britons ne'er had been licked,
    Had they stuck to the king of their island.
        Poor Harold, the king of our island!
        He lost both his life and his island!
      That's all very true: what more could he do?
        Like a Briton he died for his island!

  The Spanish armada set out to invade--a,
    'Twill sure, if they ever come nigh land.
  They couldn't do less than tuck up Queen Bess,
    And take their full swing on the island.
        O the poor queen of the island!
        The Dons came to plunder the island;
      But snug in her hive the queen was alive,
        And "buzz" was the word of the island.

  These proud puffed-up cakes thought to make ducks and drakes
    Of our wealth; but they hardly could spy land,
  When our Drake had the luck to make their pride duck
    And stoop to the lads of the island!
        O, for the ships of the island!
        The good wooden walls of the island;
      Devil or Don, let them come on;
        And see how they'd come off the island!

  Since Freedom and Neptune have hitherto kept time,
    In each saying, "This shall be my land";
  Should the "Army of England," or all it could bring, land,
    We'd show 'em some play for the island.
        We'd fight for our right to the island;
        We'd give them enough of the island;
      Invaders should just--bite once at the dust,
        But not a bit more of the island.

THOMAS DIBDIN.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE JACOBITE ON TOWER HILL.


  He tripped up the steps with a bow and a smile,
  Offering snuff to the chaplain the while,
  A rose at his button-hole that afternoon--
  'Twas the tenth of the month, and the month it was June.

  Then shrugging his shoulders, he looked at the man
  With the mask and the axe, and a murmuring ran
  Through the crowd, who below, were all pushing to see
  The gaoler kneel down, and receiving his fee.

  He looked at the mob, as they roared, with a stare,
  And took snuff again with a cynical air.
  "I'm happy to give but a moment's delight
  To the flower of my country agog for a sight."

  Then he looked at the block, and with scented cravat
  Dusted room for his neck, gayly doffing his hat,
  Kissed his hand to a lady, bent low to the crowd,
  Then smiling, turned round to the headsman and bowed.

  "God save King James!" he cried bravely and shrill,
  And the cry reached the houses at foot of the hill,
  "My friend with the axe, _a votre service_," he said;
  And ran his white thumb 'long the edge of the blade.

  When the multitude hissed he stood firm as a rock;
  Then kneeling, laid down his gay head on the block;
  He kissed a white rose,--in a moment 'twas red
  With the life of the bravest of any that bled.

GEORGE WALTER THORNBURY.

       *       *       *       *       *




GOD SAVE THE KING.

  God save our gracious king!
  Long live our noble king!
    God save the king!
  Send him victorious,
  Happy and glorious,
  Long to reign over us--
    God save the king!

  O Lord our God, arise!
  Scatter his enemies,
    And make them fall;
  Confound their politics,
  Frustrate their knavish tricks;
  On him our hopes we fix,
    God save us all!

  Thy choicest gifts in store
  On him be pleased to pour;
    Long may he reign.
  May he defend our laws,
  And ever give us cause,
  To sing with heart and voice--
    God save the king!

HENRY CAREY.

       *       *       *       *       *




VETERAN AND RECRUIT.


  He filled the crystal goblet
    With golden-beaded wine:
  "Come, comrades, now, I bid ye--
    'To the true love of mine!'

  "Her forehead's pure and holy,
    Her hair is tangled gold,
  Her heart to me so tender,
    To others' love is cold.

  "So drain your glasses empty
    And fill me another yet;
  Two glasses at least for the dearest
    And sweetest girl, Lisette."

  Up rose a grizzled sergeant--
    "My true love I give thee,
  Three true loves blent in one love,
    A soldier's trinity.

  "Here's to the flag we follow,
    Here's to the land we serve,
  And here's to holy honor
    That doth the two preserve."

  Then rose they up around him,
    And raised their eyes above,
  And drank in solemn silence
    Unto the sergeant's love.

EDWARD WENTWORTH HAZEWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PRIVATE OF THE BUFFS;[A] OR,
THE BRITISH SOLDIER IN CHINA.

["Some Seiks, and a private of the Buffs, having remained behind with
the grog carts, fell into the hands of the Chinese. On the next day
they were brought before the authorities and ordered to perform
_Kotou_. The Seiks obeyed, but Moyse, the English soldier, declared he
would not prostrate himself before any Chinaman alive, and was
immediately knocked upon the head, and his body thrown upon a
dunghill."--_China Correspondent of the London Times.]_


  Last night, among his fellow roughs,
    He jested, quaffed, and swore;
  A drunken private of the Buffs,
    Who never looked before.
  To-day, beneath the foeman's frown,
    He stands in Elgin's place,
  Ambassador from Britain's crown,
    And type of all her race.

  Poor, reckless, rude, low-born, untaught,
    Bewildered, and alone,
  A heart, with English instinct fraught,
    He yet can call his own.
  Ay, tear his body limb from limb,
    Bring cord or axe or flame,
  He only knows that not through him
    Shall England come to shame.

  Far Kentish hop-fields round him seemed,
    Like dreams, to come and go;
  Bright leagues of cherry-blossom gleamed,
    One sheet of living snow;
  The smoke above his father's door
    In gray soft eddyings hung;
  Must he then watch it rise no more,
    Doomed by himself so young?

  Yes, honor calls!--with strength like steel
    He put the vision by;
  Let dusky Indians whine and kneel,
    An English lad must die.
  And thus, with eyes that would not shrink,
    With knee to man unbent,
  Unfaltering on its dreadful brink,
    To his red grave he went.

  Vain mightiest fleets of iron framed,
    Vain those all-shattering guns,
  Unless proud England keep untamed
    The strong heart of her sons;
  So let his name through Europe ring,--
    A man of mean estate,
  Who died, as firm as Sparta's king,
    Because his soul was great.

[Footnote A: The "Buffs" are the East Kent Regiment.]

SIR FRANCIS HASTINGS DOYLE.




THE TURK IN ARMENIA.


FROM "THE PURPLE EAST."

  What profits it, O England, to prevail
    In camp and mart and council, and bestrew
    With argosies thy oceans, and renew
  With tribute levied on each golden gale
  Thy treasuries, if thou canst hear the wail
    Of women martyred by the turbaned crew,
    Whose tenderest mercy was the sword that slew,
  And lift no hand to wield the purging flail?
    We deemed of old thou held'st a charge from Him
    Who watches girdled by his seraphim,
  To smite the wronger with thy destined rod.
    Wait'st thou his sign? Enough, the unanswered cry
    Of virgin souls for vengeance, and on high
  The gathering blackness of the frown of God!

WILLIAM WATSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




AVE IMPERATRIX.


  Set in this stormy Northern sea,
    Queen of these restless fields of tide,
  England! what shall men say of thee,
    Before whose feet the worlds divide?

  The earth, a brittle globe of glass,
    Lies in the hollow of thy hand,
  And through its heart of crystal pass,
    Like shadows through a twilight land,

  The spears of crimson-suited war,
    The long white-crested waves of fight,
  And all the deadly fires which are
    The torches of the lords of Night.

  The yellow leopards, strained and lean,
    The treacherous Russian knows so well,
  With gaping blackened jaws are seen
    To leap through hail of screaming shell.

  The strong sea-lion of England's wars
    Hath left his sapphire cave of sea,
  To battle with the storm that mars
    The star of England's chivalry.

  The brazen-throated clarion blows
    Across the Pathan's reedy fen,
  And the high steeps of Indian snows
    Shake to the tread of armed men.

  And many an Afghan chief, who lies
    Beneath his cool pomegranate-trees,
  Clutches his sword in fierce surmise
    When on the mountain-side he sees

  The fleet-foot Marri scout, who comes
    To tell how he hath heard afar
  The measured roll of English drums
    Beat at the gates of Kandahar.

  For southern wind and east wind meet
    Where, girt and crowned by sword and fire,
  England with bare and bloody feet
    Climbs the steep road of wide empire.

  O lonely Himalayan height,
    Gray pillar of the Indian sky,
  Where saw'st thou last in clanging fight
    Our winged dogs of Victory?

  The almond groves of Samarcand,
    Bokhara, where red lilies blow,
  And Oxus, by whose yellow sand
    The grave white-turbaned merchants go;

  And on from thence to Ispahan,
    The gilded garden of the sun,
  Whence the long dusty caravan
    Brings cedar and vermilion;

  And that dread city of Cabool
    Set at the mountain's scarped feet,
  Whose marble tanks are ever full
    With water for the noonday heat,

  Where through the narrow straight Bazaar
    A little maid Circasian
  Is led, a present from the Czar
    Unto some old and bearded khan,--

  Here have our wild war-eagles flown,
    And flapped wide wings in fiery flight;
  But the sad dove, that sits alone
    In England--she hath no delight.

  In vain the laughing girl will lean
    To greet her love with love-lit eyes:
  Down in some treacherous black ravine,
    Clutching his flag, the dead boy lies.

  And many a moon and sun will see
    The lingering wistful children wait
  To climb upon their father's knee;
    And in each house made desolate

  Pale women who have lost their lord
    Will kiss the relics of the slain--
  Some tarnished epaulette--some sword--
    Poor toys to soothe such anguished pain.

  For not in quiet English fields
    Are these, our brothers, lain to rest,
  Where we might deck their broken shields
    With all the flowers the dead love best.

  For some are by the Delhi walls,
    And many in the Afghan land,
  And many where the Ganges falls
    Through seven mouths of shifting sand.

  And some in Russian waters lie,
    And others in the seas which are
  The portals to the East, or by
    The wind-swept heights of Trafalgar.

  O wandering graves! O restless sleep!
    O silence of the sunless day!
  O still ravine! O stormy deep!
    Give up your prey! Give up your prey!

  And those whose wounds are never healed,
    Whose weary race is never won,
  O Cromwell's England! must thou yield
    For every inch of ground a son?

  Go! crown with thorns thy gold-crowned head,
    Change thy glad song to song of pain;
  Wind and wild wave have got thy dead,
    And will not yield them back again.

  Wave and wild wind and foreign shore
    Possess the flower of English land--
  Lips that thy lips shall kiss no more,
    Hands that shall never clasp thy hand.

  What profit now that we have bound
    The whole round world with nets of gold,
  If hidden in our heart is found
    The care that groweth never old?

  What profit that our galleys ride,
    Pine-forest like, on every main?
  Ruin and wreck are at our side,
    Grim warders of the House of pain.

  Where are the brave, the strong, the fleet?
    Where is our English chivalry?
  Wild grasses are their burial-sheet,
    And sobbing waves their threnody.

  O loved ones lying far away,
    What word of love can dead lips send?
  O wasted dust! O senseless clay!
    Is this the end? is this the end?

  Peace, peace! we wrong the noble dead
    To vex their solemn slumber so;
  Though, childless, and with thorn-crowned head,
    Up the steep road must England go,

  Yet when this fiery web is spun,
    Her watchmen shall descry from far
  The young Republic like a sun
    Rise from these crimson seas of war.

OSCAR WILDE.

       *       *       *       *       *




AMERICA TO GREAT BRITAIN.


      All hail; thou noble land,
        Our Fathers' native soil!
      O, stretch thy mighty hand,
        Gigantic grown by toil,
  O'er the vast Atlantic wave to our shore!
      For thou with magic might
      Canst reach to where the light
      Of Phoebus travels bright
      The world o'er!

      The genius of our clime
        From his pine-embattled steep
      Shall hail the guest sublime;
        While the Tritons of the deep
  With their conchs the kindred league shall proclaim.
      Then let the world combine,--
      O'er the main our naval line
      Like the Milky Way shall shine
        Bright in flame!

      Though ages long have passed
        Since our Fathers left their home,
      Their pilot in the blast,
        O'er untravelled seas to roam,
  Yet lives the blood of England in our veins!
      And shall we not proclaim
      That blood of honest fame
      Which no tyranny can tame
        By its chains?

      While the language free and bold
        Which the Bard of Avon sung,
      In which our Milton told
        How the vault of heaven rung
  When Satan, blasted, fell with his host;
      While this, with reverence meet,
      Ten thousand echoes greet,
      From rock to rock repeat
        Round our coast;

      While the manners, while the arts,
        That mould a nation's soul,
      Still cling around our hearts,--
        Between let Ocean roll,
  Our joint communion breaking with the sun:
      Yet still from either beach
      The voice of blood shall reach,
      More audible than speech,
        "We are One."

WASHINGTON ALLSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




HANDS ALL ROUND.


      First drink a health, this solemn night,
        A health to England, every guest:
      That man's the best cosmopolite
        Who loves his native country best.
      May Freedom's oak for ever live
        With stronger life from day to day:
      That man's the best Conservative
        Who lops the moulded branch away.
            Hands all round!
        God the tyrant's hope confound!
  To this great cause of Freedom drink, my friends,
  And the great name of England, round and round.

      A health to Europe's honest men!
        Heaven guard them from her tyrants' jails!
      From wronged Poerio's noisome den,
        From iron limbs and tortured nails!
      We curse the crimes of southern kings,
        The Russian whips and Austrian rods:
      We likewise have our evil things,--
        Too much we make our ledgers, gods.
            Yet hands all round!
        God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To Europe's better health we drink, my friends,
  And the great name of England, round and round!

      What health to France, if France be she,
        Whom martial progress only charms?
      Yet tell her--better to be free
        Than vanquish all the world in arms.
      Her frantic city's flashing heats
        But fire, to blast the hopes of men.
      Why change the titles of your streets?
        You fools, you'll want them all again.
            Hands all round!
        God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To France, the wiser France, we drink, my friends,
  And the great name of England, round and round.

      Gigantic daughter of the West,
        We drink to thee across the flood!
      We know thee and we love thee best;
        For art thou not of British blood?
      Should war's mad blast again be blown,
        Permit not thou the tyrant powers
      To fight thy mother here alone,
        But let thy broadsides roar with ours.
            Hands all round!
        God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our great kinsman of the West, my friends,
  And the great name of England, round and round.

      Oh rise, our strong Atlantic sons,
        When war against our freedom springs!
      Oh, speak to Europe through your guns!
        They _can_ be understood by kings.
      You must not mix our Queen with those
        That wish to keep their people fools:
      Our freedom's foemen are her foes;
        She comprehends the race she rules.
          Hands all round!
        God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our great kinsman in the West, my friends,
  And the great cause of Freedom, round and round.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




RECESSIONAL.


  God of our fathers, known of old,--
    Lord of our far-flung battle line,--
  Beneath whose awful hand we hold
    Dominion over palm and pine,--
  Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
  Lest we forget,--lest we forget!

  The tumult and the shouting dies,
    The captains and the kings depart:
  Still stands thine ancient sacrifice,--
    An humble and a contrite heart.
  Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
  Lest we forget,--lest we forget!

  Far-called, our navies melt away;
    On dune and headland sinks the fire.
  Lo! all our pomp of yesterday
  Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
    Judge of the nations, spare us yet,
  Lest we forget,--lest we forget!

  If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
    Wild tongues that have not thee in awe,
  Such boasting as the Gentiles use
    Or lesser breeds without the law,--
  Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
  Lest we forget,--lest we forget!

  For heathen heart that puts her trust
    In reeking tube and iron shard,
  All valiant dust that builds on dust,
    And guarding calls not thee to guard,
  For frantic boasts and foolish word,
  Thy mercy on thy people, Lord!
            _Amen_.

RUDYARD KIPLING.

       *       *       *       *       *




ENGLAND AND HER COLONIES.


  She stands, a thousand-wintered tree,
    By countless morns impearled;
  Her broad roots coil beneath the sea,
    Her branches sweep the world;
  Her seeds, by careless winds conveyed,
    Clothe the remotest strand
  With forests from her scatterings made,
  New nations fostered in her shade,
    And linking land with land.

  O ye by wandering tempest sown
    'Neath every alien star,
  Forget not whence the breath was blown
    That wafted you afar!
  For ye are still her ancient seed
    On younger soil let fall--
  Children of Britain's island-breed,
  To whom the Mother in her need
    Perchance may one day call.

WILLIAM WATSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




SCOTLAND.

FROM "THE LAY OF THE LAST MINSTREL," CANTO VI.


  O Caledonia! stern and wild,
  Meet nurse for a poetic child!
  Land of brown heath and shaggy wood,
  Land of the mountain and the flood,
  Land of my sires! what mortal hand
  Can e'er untie the filial band
  That knits me to thy rugged strand?
  Still, as I view each well-known scene,
  Think what is now, and what hath been,
  Seems, as to me, of all bereft,
  Sole friends thy woods and streams were left;
  And thus I love them better still,
  Even in extremity of ill.
  By Yarrow's stream still let me stray,
  Though none should guide my feeble way;
  Still feel the breeze down Ettrick break,
  Although it chilled my withered cheek;
  Still lay my head by Teviot stone,
  Though there, forgotten and alone,
  The bard may draw his parting groan.

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BARD.

A PINDARIC ODE.


I

  "Ruin seize thee, ruthless King!
    Confusion on thy banners wait;
  Tho' fanned by Conquest's crimson wing,
    They mock the air with idle state,
  Helm, nor hauberk's twisted mail,
  Nor e'en thy virtues, Tyrant, shall avail
    To save thy secret soul from nightly fears,
    From Cambria's curse, from Cambria's tears!"
  Such were the sounds that o'er the crested pride
    Of the first Edward scattered wild dismay,
  As down the steep of Snowdon's shaggy side
    He wound with toilsome march his long array.
  Stout Glo'ster stood aghast in speechless trance:
  "To arms!" cried Mortimer, and couched his quiv'ring lance.

    On a rock, whose haughty brow
  Frowns o'er cold Conway's foaming flood,
    Robed in the sable garb of woe,
  With haggard eyes the poet stood:
  (Loose his beard, and hoary hair
  Streamed, like a meteor, to the troubled air)
  And with a master's hand, and prophet's fire,
  Struck the deep sorrows of his lyre.
  "Hark how each giant oak, and desert cave,
    Sighs to the torrent's awful voice beneath!
  O'er thee, O King! their hundred arms they wave,
    Revenge on thee in hoarser murmurs breathe;
  Vocal no more, since Cambria's fatal day,
  To high-born Hoel's harp, or soft Llewellyn's lay.

    "Cold is Cadwallo's tongue,
    That hushed the stormy main:
  Brave Urien sleeps upon his craggy bed:
    Mountains, ye mourn in vain
    Modred, whose magic song
  Made huge Plinlimmon bow his cloud-topt head.
    On dreary Arvon's shore they lie,
  Smeared with gore, and ghastly pale;
  Far, far aloof th' affrighted ravens sail;
    The famished eagle screams, and passes by.
  Dear lost companions of my tuneful art,
    Dear as the light that visits these sad eyes,
  Dear as the ruddy drops that warm my heart,
    Ye died amidst your dying country's cries--
  No more I weep. They do not sleep.
   On yonder cliffs, a grisly band,
  I see them sit, they linger yet,
    Avengers of their native land:
  With me in dreadful harmony they join,
  And weave with bloody hands the tissues of thy line.


II.

    "Weave the warp, and weave the woof,
  The winding sheet of Edward's race.
    Give ample room, and verge enough
  The characters of hell to trace.
  Mark the year, and mark the night,
  When Severn shall re-echo with affright
  The shrieks of death, thro' Berkeley's roof that ring,
  Shrieks of an agonizing king!
    She-wolf of France, with unrelenting fangs,
  That tear'st the bowels of thy mangled mate,
    From thee be born, who o'er thy country hangs
  The scourge of Heaven. What Terrors round him wait!
  Amazement in his van, with Flight combined,
  And Sorrow's faded form, and solitude behind.

    "Mighty victor, mighty lord!
  Low on his funeral couch he lies!
    No pitying heart, no eye, afford
  A tear to grace his obsequies.
  Is the sable warrior fled?
  Thy son is gone. He rests among the dead.
  The swarm, that in thy noon-tide beam were born,
  Gone to salute the rising morn.
  Fair laughs the morn, and soft the zephyr blows.
    While proudly riding o'er the azure realm
  In gallant trim the gilded vessel goes;
    Youth on the prow, and Pleasure at the helm;
  Regardless of the sweeping whirlwind's sway,
  That, hushed in grim repose, expects his evening prey.

    "Fill high the sparkling bowl,
  The rich repast prepare,
    Reft of a crown, he yet may share the feast;
  Close by the regal chair
    Fell Thirst and Famine scowl
    A baleful smile upon their baffled guest.
  Heard ye the din of battle bray,
    Lance to lance, and horse to horse?
    Long years of havoc, urged their destined course,
  And through the kindred squadrons mow their way.
    Ye towers of Julius, London's lasting shame,
  With many a foul and midnight murder fed,
    Revere his consort's faith, his father's fame,
  And spare the meek usurper's holy head.
  Above, below, the rose of snow,
    Twined with her blushing foe, we spread:
  The bristled Boar in infant-gore
    Wallows beneath the thorny shade.
  Now, brothers, bending o'er the accursed loom,
  Stamp we our vengeance deep, and ratify his doom.


III.

    "Edward, lo! to sudden fate
  (Weave we the woof. The thread is spun.)
    Half of thy heart we consecrate.
  (The web is wove. The work is done.)
  Stay, oh stay! nor thus forlorn
  Leave me unblessed, unpitied, here to mourn:
  In yon bright track, that fires the western skies,
  They melt, they vanish from my eyes.
  But oh! what solemn scenes on Snowdon's height
    Descending slow their glittering skirts unroll?
  Visions of glory, spare my aching sight!
    Ye unborn ages, crowd not on my soul!
  No more our long-lost Arthur we bewail.
  All hail, ye genuine kings, Britannia's issue, hail!

    "Girt with many a baron bold
  Sublime their starry fronts they rear;
    And gorgeous dames, and statesmen old
  In bearded majesty, appear.
  In the midst a form divine!
  Her eye proclaims her of the Briton line:
  Her lion-port, her awe-commanding face,
  Attempered sweet to virgin-grace.
  What strings symphonious tremble in the air,
    What strains of vocal transport round her play!
  Hear from the grave, great Taliessin, hear;
    They breathe a soul to animate thy clay.
  Bright Rapture calls, and soaring as she sings,
  Waves in the eye of heaven her many-colored wings.

   "The verse adorn again,
    Fierce War, and faithful Love,
  And Truth severe by fairy fiction drest.
    In buskined measure move
  Pale Grief and pleasing Pain,
  With Horror, tyrant of the throbbing breast.
    A voice, as of the cherub-choir,
  Gales from blooming Eden bear;
  And distant warblings lessen on my ear,
    That lost in long futurity expire.
  Fond impious man, think'st thou yon sanguine cloud,
    Raised by thy breath, has quenched the orb of day?
  To-morrow he repairs the golden flood,
    And warms the nations with redoubled ray.
  Enough for me; with joy I see
    The different doom our fates assign.
  Be thine Despair, and sceptred Care,
    To triumph, and to die, are mine."
  He spoke and headlong from the mountain's height
  Deep in the roaring tide he plunged to endless night.

THOMAS GRAY.

       *       *       *       *       *




MY HEART'S IN THE HIGHLANDS.


  My heart's in the Highlands, my heart is not here;
  My heart's in the Highlands a-chasing the deer;
  Chasing the wild deer, and following the roe.
  My heart's in the Highlands, wherever I go.
  Farewell to the Highlands, farewell to the North,
  The birthplace of valor, the country of worth;
  Wherever I wander, wherever I rove,
  The hills of the Highlands forever I love.

  Farewell to the mountains high covered with snow;
  Farewell to the straths and green valleys below;
  Farewell to the forests and wild-hanging woods;
  Farewell to the torrents and loud-pouring floods.
  My heart's in the Highlands, my heart is not here;
  My heart's in the Highlands a-chasing the deer;
  Chasing the wild deer, and following the roe.
  My heart's in the Highlands wherever I go.

ROBERT BURNS.

       *       *       *       *       *


HEATHER ALE: A GALLOWAY LEGEND.


  From the bonny bells of heather
    They brewed a drink long-syne,
  Was sweeter far than honey,
    Was stronger far than wine.
  They brewed it and they drank it,
    And lay in a blessed swound
  For days and days together
    In the dwellings underground.

  There rose a king in Scotland,
    A fell man to his foes,
  He smote the Picts in battle,
    He hunted them like roes.
  Over miles of the red mountain
    He hunted as they fled,
  And strewed the dwarfish bodies
    Of the dying and the dead.

  Summer came in the country,
    Red was the heather bell;
  But the manner of the brewing
    Was none alive to tell.
  In graves that were like children's
    On many a mountain head,
  The Brewsters of the Heather
    Lay numbered with the dead.

  The king in the red moorland
    Rode on a summer's day;
  And the bees hummed, and the curlews
    Cried beside the way.
  The king rode, and was angry;
    Black was his brow and pale,
  To rule in a land of heather
    And lack the Heather Ale.

  It fortuned that his vassals,
    Riding free on the heath,
  Came on a stone that was fallen
    And vermin hid beneath.
  Rudely plucked from their hiding,
    Never a word they spoke:
  A son and his aged father--
    Last of the dwarfish folk.

  The king sat high on his charger,
    He looked on the little men;
  And the dwarfish and swarthy couple
    Looked at the king again.
  Down by the shore he had them;
    And there on the giddy brink--
  "I will give you life, ye vermin,
    For the secret of the drink."

  There stood the son and father
    And they looked high and low;
  The heather was red around them,
    The sea rumbled below.
  And up and spoke the father,
    Shrill was his voice to hear;
  "I have a word in private,
    A word for the royal ear.

  "Life is dear to the aged,
    And honor a little thing;
  I would gladly sell the secret,"
    Quoth the Pict to the King.
  His voice was small as a sparrow's,
    And shrill and wonderful clear:
  "I would gladly sell my secret,
    Only my son I fear.

  "For life is a little matter,
    And death is nought to the young;
  And I dare not sell my honor
    Under the eye of my son.
  Take _him_, O king, and bind him,
    And cast him far in the deep;
  And it's I will tell the secret.
    That I have sworn to keep."

  They took the son and bound him,
    Neck and heels in a thong,
  And a lad took him and swung him,
    And flung him far and strong,
  And the sea swallowed his body,
    Like that of a child of ten;--
  And there on the cliff stood the father,
    Last of the dwarfish men.

  "True as the word I told you:
    Only my son I feared;
  For I doubt the sapling courage
    That goes without the beard.
  But now in vain is the torture,
    Fire shall never avail:
  Here dies in my bosom
    The secret of Heather Ale."

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.


       *       *       *       *       *




THE EXECUTION OF MONTROSE.


[James Graham, Marquis of Montrose, was executed in Edinburgh, May 21,
1650, for an attempt to overthrow the Commonwealth and restore Charles
II.]

  Come hither, Evan Cameron!
    Come, stand behind my knee--
  I hear the river roaring down
    Toward the wintry sea.
  There's shouting on the mountain-side,
    There's war within the blast--
  Old faces look upon me,
    Old forms go trooping past.
  I hear the pibroch wailing
    Amidst the din of fight,
  And my dim spirit wakes again
    Upon the verge of night.

  'Twas I that led the Highland host
    Through wild Lochaber's snows,
  What time the plaided clans came down
    To battle with Montrose.
  I've told thee how the Southrons fell
    Beneath the broad claymore,
  And how we smote the Campbell clan
    By Inverlochy's shore.
  I've told thee how we swept Dundee,
    And tamed the Lindsays' pride;
  But never have I told thee yet
    How the great Marquis died.

  A traitor sold him to his foes;--
    O deed of deathless shame!
  I charge thee, boy, if e'er thou meet
    With one of Assynt's name--
  Be it upon the mountain's side,
    Or yet within the glen,
  Stand he in martial gear alone,
    Or backed by armed men--
  Face him as thou wouldst face the man
    Who wronged thy sire's renown;
  Remember of what blood thou art,
    And strike the caitiff down!

  They brought him to the Watergate,
    Hard bound with hempen span.
  As though they held a lion there,
    And not a 'fenceless man.
  They set him high upon a cart--
    The hangman rode below--
  They drew his hands behind his back,
    And bared his noble brow.
  Then, as a hound is slipped from leash,
    They cheered the common throng,
  And blew the note with yell and shout,
    And bade him pass along.

  It would have made a brave man's heart
    Grow sad and sick that day.
  To watch the keen, malignant eyes
    Bent down on that array.
  There stood the Whig west-country lords
    In balcony and bow;
  There sat their gaunt and withered dames,
    And their daughters all a-row.
  And every open window
    Was full as full might be
  With black-robed Covenanting carles,
    That goodly sport to see!

  But when he came, though pale and wan,
    He looked so great and high,
  So noble was his manly front,
    So calm his steadfast eye;--
  The rabble rout forbore to shout,
    And each man held his breath,
  For well they knew the hero's soul
    Was face to face with death.
  And then a mournful shudder
    Through all the people crept,
  And some that came to scoff at him
    Now turned aside and wept.

  But onward--always onward,
    In silence and in gloom,
  The dreary pageant labored,
    Till it reached the house of doom.
  Then first a woman's voice was heard
    In jeer and laughter loud,
  And an angry cry and a hiss arose
    From the heart of the tossing crowd:
  Then, as the Graeme looked upward,
    He saw the ugly smile
  Of him who sold his king for gold--
    The master-fiend Argyle!

  The Marquis gazed a moment,
    And nothing did he say,
  But the cheek of Argyle grew ghastly pale,
    And he turned his eyes away.
  The painted harlot by his side,
    She shook through every limb,
  For a roar like thunder swept the street,
    And hands were clenched at him;
  And a Saxon soldier cried aloud,
    "Back, coward, from thy place!
  For seven long years thou hast not dared
    To look him in the face."

  Had I been there with sword in hand,
    And fifty Camerons by,
  That day through high Dunedin's streets
    Had pealed the slogan-cry.
  Not all their troops of trampling horse,
    Nor might of mailed men--
  Not all the rebels in the south
    Had borne us backward then!
  Once more his foot on Highland heath
    Had trod as free as air,
  Or I, and all who bore my name,
    Been laid around him there!

  It might not be. They placed him next
    Within the solemn hall,
  Where once the Scottish kings were throned
    Amidst their nobles all.
  But there was dust of vulgar feet
    On that polluted floor,
  And perjured traitors filled the place
    Where good men sate before.
  With savage glee came Warriston
    To read the murderous doom;
  And then uprose the great Montrose
    In the middle of the room:

  "Now, by my faith as belted knight
    And by the name I bear,
  And by the bright St. Andrew's cross
    That waves above us there--
  Yea, by a greater, mightier oath--
    And O that such should be!--
  By that dark stream of royal blood
    That lies 'twixt you and me--
  I have not sought in battle-field
    A wreath of such renown,
  Nor dared I hope on my dying day
    To win the martyr's crown!

  "There is a chamber far away
    Where sleep the good and brave,
  But a better place ye have named for me
    Than by my father's grave.
  For truth and right, 'gainst treason's might,
    This hand has always striven,
  And ye raise it up for a witness still
    In the eye of earth and heaven.
  Then nail my head on yonder tower--
    Give every town a limb--
  And God who made shall gather them:
    I go from you to Him!"

  The morning dawned full darkly,
    The rain came flashing down,
  And the jagged streak of the levin bolt
    Lit up the gloomy town.
  The thunder crashed across the heaven,
    The fatal hour was come;
  Yet aye broke in, with muffled beat,
    The 'larum of the drum.
  There was madness on the earth below
    And anger in the sky,
  And young and old, and rich and poor,
    Came forth to see him die.

  Ah God! that ghastly gibbet!
    How dismal 'tis to see
  The great tall spectral skeleton,
    The ladder and the tree!
  Hark! hark! it is the clash of arms,--
    The bells begin to toll,--
  "He is coming! he is coming!
    God's mercy on his soul!"
  One last long peal of thunder,--
    The clouds are cleared away.
  And the glorious sun once more looks down
    Amidst the dazzling day.

  "He is coming! he is coming!"
    Like a bridegroom from his room
  Came the hero from his prison
    To the scaffold and the doom.
  There was glory on his forehead,
    There was lustre in his eye,
  And he never walked to battle
    More proudly than to die.
  There was color in his visage,
    Though the cheeks of all were wan;
  And they marvelled as they saw him pass,
    That great and goodly man!

  He mounted up the scaffold,
    And he turned him to the crowd;
  But they dared not trust the people,
    So he might not speak aloud.
  But he looked upon the heavens,
    And they were clear and blue,
  And in the liquid ether
    The eye of God shone through:
  Yet a black and murky battlement
    Lay resting on the hill,
  As though the thunder slept within,--
    All else was calm and still.

  The grim Geneva ministers
    With anxious scowl drew near,
  As you have seen the ravens flock
    Around the dying deer.
  He would not deign them word nor sign,
    But alone he bent the knee;
  And veiled his face for Christ's dear grace
    Beneath the gallows-tree.
  Then, radiant and serene, he rose,
    And cast his cloak away;
  For he had ta'en his latest look
    Of earth and sun and day.

  A beam of light fell o'er him,
    Like a glory round the shriven,
  And he climbed the lofty ladder
    As it were the path to heaven.
  Then came a flash from out the cloud,
    And a stunning thunder-roll;
  And no man dared to look aloft,--
    Fear was on every soul.
  There was another heavy sound,
    A hush, and then a groan;
  And darkness swept across the sky,--
    The work of death was done!

WILLIAM EDMONDSTOUNE AYTOUN.

       *       *       *       *       *




BORDER BALLAD.


  March, march, Ettrick and Teviotdale!
    Why the de'il dinna ye march forward in order?
  March, march, Eskdale and Liddesdale!
    All the Blue Bonnets are over the Border!
            Many a banner spread
            Flutters above your head,
  Many a crest that is famous in story!--
            Mount and make ready, then,
            Sons of the mountain glen,
  Fight for the queen and our old Scottish glory.

  Come from the hills where your hirsels are grazing;
    Come from the glen of the buck and the roe;
  Come to the crag where the beacon is blazing;
    Come with the buckler, the lance, and the bow.
            Trumpets are sounding;
            War-steeds are bounding;
  Stand to your arms, and march in good order,
             England shall many a day
             Tell of the bloody fray,
  When the Blue Bonnets came over the Border.

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE EXILE'S SONG.


  Oh! why left I my hame?
    Why did I cross the deep?
  Oh! why left I the land
    Where my forefathers sleep?
  I sigh for Scotia's shore,
    And I gaze across the sea,
  But I canna get a blink
    O' my ain countrie.

  The palm-tree waveth high,
    And fair the myrtle springs;
  And, to the Indian maid,
    The bulbul sweetly sings.
  But I dinna see the broom
    Wi' its tassels on the lee,
  Nor hear the lintie's sang
    O' my ain countrie.

  Oh! here no Sabbath bell
    Awakes the Sabbath morn,
  Nor song of reapers heard
    Among the yellow corn:
  For the tyrant's voice is here,
    And the wail of slaverie;
  But the sun of freedom shines
    In my ain countrie.

  There's a hope for every woe,
    And a balm for every pain,
  But the first joys o' our heart
    Come never back again.
  There's a track upon the deep,
    And a path across the sea:
  But the weary ne'er return
    To their ain countrie.

ROBERT GILFILLAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE IRISHMAN.


  The savage loves his native shore,
    Though rude the soil and chill the air;
  Then well may Erin's sons adore
    Their isle which nature formed so fair,
  What flood reflects a shore so sweet
    As Shannon great or pastoral Bann?
  Or who a friend or foe can meet
    So generous as an Irishman?

  His hand is rash, his heart is warm,
    But honesty is still his guide;
  None more repents a deed of harm,
    And none forgives with nobler pride;
  He may be duped, but won't be dared--
    More fit to practise than to plan;
  He dearly earns his poor reward,
    And spends it like an Irishman.

  If strange or poor, for you he'll pay,
    And guide to where you safe may be;
  If you're his guest, while e'er you stay,
    His cottage holds a jubilee.
  His inmost soul he will unlock,
    And if he may _your_ secrets scan,
  Your confidence he scorns to mock,
    For faithful is an Irishman.

  By honor bound in woe or weal,
    Whate'er she bids he dares to do;
  Try him with bribes--they won't prevail;
    Prove him in fire--you'll find him true.
  He seeks not safety, let his post
    Be where it ought in danger's van;
  And if the field of fame be lost,
    It won't be by an Irishman.

  Erin! loved land! from age to age,
    Be thou more great, more famed, and free,
  May peace be thine, or shouldst thou wage
    Defensive war, cheap victory.
  May plenty bloom in every field
    Which gentle breezes softly fan,
  And cheerful smiles serenely gild
    The home of every Irishman.

JAMES ORR.

       *       *       *       *       *




TURLOUGH MACSWEENEY.


_A health to you, Piper,
     And your pipes silver-tongued, clear and sweet in their crooning_!

  Full of the music they gathered at morn
    On your high heather hills from the lark on the wing,
  From the blackbird at eve on the blossoming thorn,
    From the little green linnet whose plaining they sing,
  And the joy and the hope in the heart of the Spring,
        O, Turlough MacSweeney!

  Play us our Eire's most sorrowful songs,
    As she sits by her reeds near the wash of the wave,
  That the coldest may thrill at the count of her wrongs,
    That the sword may flash forth from the scabbard to save,
  And the wide land awake at the wrath of the brave,
        O, Turlough MacSweeney!

  Play as the bards played in days long ago,
    When O'Donnell, arrayed for the foray or feast,
  With your kinsmen from Bannat and Fannat and Doe,
    With piping and harping, and blessing of priest,
  Rode out in the blaze of the sun from the East,
            O, Turlough MacSweeney!

  Play as they played in that rapturous hour
    When the clans heard in gladness his young fiery call
  Who burst from the gloom of the Sassenach tower,
    And sped to the welcome in dear Donegal,
  Then on to his hailing as chieftain of all--
            O, Turlough MacSweeney!

  Play as they played, when, a trumpet of war,
    His voice for the rally, pealed up to the blue,
  And the kerns from the hills and the glens and the scaur
    Marched after the banner of conquering Hugh--
  Led into the fray by a piper like you,
            O, Turlough MacSweeney!

  And surely no note of such music shall fail,
    Wherever the speech of our Eire is heard,
  To foster the hope of the passionate Gael,
    To fan the old hatred, relentless when stirred,
  To strengthen our souls for the strife to be dared,
            O, Turlough MacSweeney!

  _May your pipes, silver-tongued, clear and sweet in their crooning,
  Keep the magic they captured at dawning and even
  From the blackbird at home, and the lark on its journey,
  From the thrush on its spray, and the little green linnet.
            A health to you, Piper!_

ANNA MACMANUS (_Ethna Carbery_).

       *       *       *       *       *




A SPINNING SONG.


      My love to fight the Saxon goes,
        And bravely shines his sword of steel;
      A heron's feather decks his brows,
        And a spur on either heel;
      His steed is blacker than the sloe,
        And fleeter than the falling star;
      Amid the surging ranks he'll go
        And shout for joy of war.
  Twinkle, twinkle, pretty spindle; let the white wool drift and dwindle.
    Oh! we weave a damask doublet for my love's coat of steel.
  Hark! the timid, turning treadle crooning soft, old-fashioned ditties
    To the low, slow murmur of the brown round wheel.

      My love is pledged to Ireland's fight;
        My love would die for Ireland's weal,
      To win her back her ancient right,
        And make her foemen reel.
      Oh! close I'll clasp him to my breast
        When homeward from the war he comes;
      The fires shall light the mountain's crest,
        The valley peal with drums.
  Twinkle, twinkle, pretty spindle; let the white wool drift and dwindle.
    Oh! we weave a damask doublet for my love's coat of steel.
  Hark! the timid, turning treadle crooning soft old-fashioned ditties
    To the low, slow murmur of the brown round wheel.

JOHN FRANCIS O'DONNELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE WEARING OF THE GREEN.[A]

[Footnote A: Variation of an old street song of about 1798. Sung in Dion
Boucicault's play "The Shan Van Voght."]


  O Paddy dear, an' did you hear the news that's goin' round?
  The shamrock is forbid by law to grow on Irish ground;
  St. Patrick's Day no more we'll keep; his colors can't be seen:
  For there's a cruel law agin' the wearin' of the green.
  I met with Napper Tandy, and he tuk me by the hand,
  And he said, "How's poor ould Ireland, and how does she stand?"
  She's the most distressful country that ever yet was seen:
  They are hangin' men and women there for wearin' of the green.

  An' if the color we must wear is England's cruel red,
  Sure Ireland's sons will ne'er forget the blood that they have shed.
  Then pull the shamrock from your hat and cast it on the sod,
  And never fear, 'twill take root there, though under foot 'tis trod.
  When law can stop the blades of grass from growin' as they grow,
  And when the leaves in summer-time their color dare not show,
  Then I will change the color, too, I wear in my caubeen;
  But till that day, please God, I'll stick to wearin' of the green.

  But if at last our color should be torn from Ireland's heart,
  Her sons with shame and sorrow from the dear old isle will part:
  I've heard a whisper of a land that lies beyond the sea,
  Where rich and poor stand equal in the light of freedom's day.
  O Erin, must we leave you, driven by a tyrant's hand?
  Must we ask a mother's blessin' from a strange and distant land?
  Where the cruel cross of England shall nevermore be seen,
  And where, please God, we'll live and die still wearin' of the green.

       *       *       *       *       *




MY NATIVE LAND.


  It chanced to me upon a time to sail
    Across the Southern ocean to and fro;
  And, landing at fair isles, by stream and vale
    Of sensuous blessing did we ofttimes go.
  And months of dreamy joys, like joys in sleep,
    Or like a clear, calm stream o'er mossy stone,
  Unnoted passed our hearts with voiceless sweep,
    And left us yearning still for lands unknown.

  And when we found one,--for 'tis soon to find
    In thousand-isled Cathay another isle,--
  For one short noon its treasures filled the mind,
    And then again we yearned, and ceased to smile.
  And so it was from isle to isle we passed,
    Like wanton bees or boys on flowers or lips;
  And when that all was tasted, then at last
    We thirsted still for draughts instead of sips.

  I learned from this there is no Southern land
    Can fill with love the hearts of Northern men.
  Sick minds need change; but, when in health they stand
    'Neath foreign skies, their love flies home agen.
  And thus with me it was: the yearning turned
    From laden airs of cinnamon away,
  And stretched far westward, while the full heart burned
    With love for Ireland, looking on Cathay!

  My first dear love, all dearer for thy grief!
    My land, that has no peer in all the sea
  For verdure, vale, or river, flower or leaf,--
    If first to no man else, thou'rt first to me.
  New loves may come with duties, but the first
    Is deepest yet,--the mother's breath and smiles;
  Like that kind face and breast where I was nursed
    Is my poor land, the Niobe of isles.

JOHN BOYLE O'REILLY.

       *       *       *       *       *




BLESS THE DEAR OLD VERDANT LAND.


  Bless the dear old verdant land!
    Brother, wert thou born of it?
  As thy shadow life doth stand
  Twining round its rosy band.
  Did an Irish mother's hand
    Guide thee in the morn of it?
  Did a father's first command
    Teach thee love or scorn of it?

  Thou who tread'st its fertile breast,
    Dost thou feel a glow for it?
  Thou of all its charms possest.
  Living on its first and best,
  Art thou but a thankless guest
    Or a traitor foe for it,
  If thou lovest, where's the test?
    Wilt thou strike a blow for it?

  Has the past no goading sting
    That can make thee rouse for it?
  Does thy land's reviving spring,
  Full of buds and blossoming,
  Fail to make thy cold heart cling,
    Breathing lover's vows for it?
  With the circling ocean's ring
    Thou wert made a spouse for it.

  Hast thou kept as thou shouldst keep
    Thy affections warm for it,
  Letting no cold feeling creep
  Like an ice-breath o'er the deep,
  Freezing to a stony sleep
    Hopes the heart would form for it,
  Glories that like rainbows peep
    Through the darkening storm for it?

  Son of this down-trodden land,
    Aid us in the fight for it.
  We seek to make it great and grand,
  Its shipless bays, its naked strand,
  By canvas-swelling breezes fanned:
    Oh, what a glorious sight for it,
  The past expiring like a brand
    In morning's rosy light for it!

  Think, this dear old land is thine,
    And thou a traitor slave of it:
  Think how the Switzer leads his kine,
  When pale the evening star doth shine;
  His song has home in every line,
    Freedom in every stave of it;
  Think how the German loves his Rhine
    And worships every wave of it!

  Our own dear land is bright as theirs,
    But oh! our hearts are cold for it;
  Awake! we are not slaves, but heirs.
  Our fatherland requires our cares,
  Our speech with men, with God our prayers;
    Spurn blood-stained Judas gold for it:
  Let us do all that honor dares--
    Be earnest, faithful, bold for it!

DENIS FLORENCE MAC CARTHY.

       *       *       *       *       *




IRELAND.

[1847.]

  They are dying! they are dying! where the golden corn is growing;
  They are dying! they are dying! where the crowded herds are lowing:
  They are gasping for existence where the streams of life are flowing,
  And they perish of the plague where the breeze of health is blowing!

  God of justice! God of power!
    Do we dream? Can it be,
  In this land, at this hour,
    With the blossom on the tree,
  In the gladsome month of May,
  When the young lambs play,
  When Nature looks around
    On her waking children now,
  The seed within the ground,
    The bud upon the bough?
  Is it right, is it fair,
  That we perish of despair
  In this land, on this soil,
    Where our destiny is set,
  Which we cultured with our toil,
    And watered with our sweat?
  We have ploughed, we have sown
  But the crop was not our own;
  We have reaped, but harpy hands
  Swept the harvest from our lands;
  We were perishing for food,
  When lo! in pitying mood,
  Our kindly rulers gave
  The fat fluid of the slave,
  While our corn filled the manger
  Of the war-horse of the stranger!

  God of mercy! must this last?
    Is this land preordained,
  For the present and the past
    And the future, to be chained,--
    To be ravaged, to be drained,
  To be robbed, to be spoiled,
    To be hushed, to be whipt,
    Its soaring pinions clipt,
  And its every effort foiled?

  Do our numbers multiply
  But to perish and to die?
    Is this all our destiny below,--
  That our bodies, as they rot,
  May fertilize the spot
    Where the harvests of the stranger grow?
    If this be, indeed, our fate,
    Far, far better now, though late,
  That we seek some other land and try some other zone;
    The coldest, bleakest shore
    Will surely yield us more
  Than the storehouse of the stranger that we dare not call our own.

    Kindly brothers of the West,
    Who from Liberty's full breast
  Have fed us, who are orphans beneath a step-dame's frown,
    Behold our happy state,
    And weep your wretched fate
  That you share not in the splendors of our empire and our crown!

    Kindly brothers of the East,--
    Thou great tiaraed priest,
  Thou sanctified Rienzi of Rome and of the earth,--
    Or thou who bear'st control
    Over golden Istambol,
  Who felt for our misfortunes and helped us in our dearth,--

    Turn here your wondering eyes,
    Call your wisest of the wise,
  Your muftis and your ministers, your men of deepest lore;
    Let the sagest of your sages
    Ope our island's mystic pages,
  And explain unto your highness the wonders of our shore.

    A fruitful, teeming soil,
    Where the patient peasants toil
  Beneath the summer's sun and the watery winter sky;
    Where they tend the golden grain
    Till it bends upon the plain,
  Then reap it for the stranger, and turn aside to die;

    Where they watch their flocks increase,
    And store the snowy fleece
  Till they send it to their masters to be woven o'er the waves;
    Where, having sent their meat
    For the foreigner to eat,
  Their mission is fulfilled, and they creep into their graves.

  'Tis for this they are dying where the golden corn is growing,
  'Tis for this they are dying where the crowded herds are lowing,
  'Tis for this they are dying where the streams of life are flowing,
  And they perish of the plague where the breeze of health is blowing!

DENIS FLORENCE MACCARTHY.

       *       *       *       *       *




IRELAND.

A SEASIDE PORTRAIT.


  A great, still Shape, alone,
   She sits (her harp has fallen) on the sand,
  And sees her children, one by one, depart:--
  Her cloak (that hides what sins beside her own!)
   Wrapped fold on fold about her. Lo,
    She comforts her fierce heart,
  As wailing some, and some gay-singing go,
  With the far vision of that Greater Land
    Deep in the Atlantic skies,
    Saint Brandan's Paradise!
    Another Woman there,
   Mighty and wondrous fair,
  Stands on her shore-rock:--one uplifted hand
    Holds a quick-piercing light
    That keeps long sea-ways bright;
  She beckons with the other, saying "Come,
    O landless, shelterless,
  Sharp-faced with hunger, worn with long distress:--
    Come hither, finding home!
  Lo, my new fields of harvest, open, free,
    By winds of blessing blown,
  Whose golden corn-blades shake from sea to sea--
  Fields without walls that all the people own!"

JOHN JAMES PIATT

       *       *       *       *       *




EXILE OF ERIN.


  There came to the beach a poor exile of Erin,
   The dew on his thin robe was heavy and chill;
  For his country he sighed, when at twilight repairing
   To wander alone by the wind-beaten hill.
  But the day-star attracted his eye's sad devotion,
  For it rose o'er his own native isle of the ocean,
  Where once, in the fire of his youthful emotion,
   He sang the bold anthem of Erin go bragh.

  Sad is my fate! said the heart-broken stranger;
   The wild deer and wolf to a covert can flee,
  But I have no refuge from famine and danger,
   A home and a country remain not to me.
  Never again in the green sunny bowers
  Where my forefathers lived shall I spend the sweet hours,
  Or cover my harp with the wild-woven flowers,
   And strike to the numbers of Erin go bragh!

  Erin, my country! though sad and forsaken,
   In dreams I revisit thy sea-beaten shore;
  But, alas! in a far foreign land I awaken,
   And sigh for the friends who can meet me no more!
  O cruel fate! wilt thou never replace me
  In a mansion of peace, where no perils can chase me?
  Never again shall my brothers embrace me?
   They died to defend me, or live to deplore!

  Where is my cabin door, fast by the wildwood?
   Sisters and sire, did ye weep for its fall?
  Where is the mother that looked on my childhood?
   And where is the bosom-friend, dearer than all?
  O my sad heart! long abandoned by pleasure,
  Why did it dote on a fast-fading treasure?
  Tears, like the rain-drop, may fall without measure,
   But rapture and beauty they cannot recall.

  Yet, all its sad recollections suppressing,
   One dying wish my lone bosom can draw,--
  Erin, an exile bequeaths thee his blessing!
   Land of my forefathers, Erin go bragh!
  Buried and cold, when my heart stills her motion,
  Green be thy fields, sweetest isle of the ocean!
  And thy harp-striking bards sing aloud with devotion,--
   Erin mavourneen, Erin go bragh![A]

[Footnote A: Ireland my darling, Ireland forever!]

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




AFTER DEATH.


  Shall mine eyes behold thy glory, O my country?
   Shall mine eyes behold thy glory?
  Or shall the darkness close around them, ere the
   sun-blaze breaks at last upon thy story?
  When the nations ope for thee their queenly circle,
   as a sweet new sister hail thee,

  Shall these lips be sealed in callous death and
    silence, that have known but to bewail thee?
  Shall the ear be deaf that only loved thy praises,
    when all men their tribute bring thee?
  Shall the mouth be clay that sang thee in thy
    squalor, when all poets' mouths shall sing thee?

  Ah, the harpings and the salvos and the shoutings
    of thy exiled sons returning!
  I should hear, though dead and mouldered, and
    the grave-damps should not chill my bosom's burning.

  Ah, the tramp of feet victorious! I should hear
    them 'mid the shamrocks and the mosses,
  And my heart should toss within the shroud and
    quiver as a captive dreamer tosses.

  I should turn and rend the cere-clothes round me,
    giant sinews I should borrow--
  Crying, "O my brothers, I have also loved her in
    her loneliness and sorrow.

  "Let me join with you the jubilant procession;
    let me chant with you her story;
  Then contented I shall go back to the shamrocks,
    now mine eyes have seen her glory!"

FRANCES ISABEL PARNELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




CANADA NOT LAST.

AT VENICE.


  Lo Venice, gay with color, lights and song,
    Calls from St. Mark's with ancient voice and strange:
  I am the Witch of Cities! glide along
    My silver streets that never wear by change
  Of years: forget the years, and pain, and wrong,
  And ever sorrow reigning men among.
    Know I can soothe thee, please and marry thee
  To my illusions. Old and siren strong,
    I smile immortal, while the mortals flee
    Who whiten on to death in wooing me.


AT FLORENCE.

  Say, what more fair by Arno's bridged gleam
    Than Florence, viewed from San Miniato's slope
  At eventide, when west along the stream
    The last of day reflects a silver hope!--
  Lo, all else softened in the twilight beam:--
  The city's mass blent in one hazy cream,
    The brown Dome 'midst it, and the Lily tower,
  And stern Old Tower more near, and hills that seem
    Afar, like clouds to fade, and hills of power
    On this side greenly dark with cypress, vine and bower.


AT ROME.

  End of desire to stray I feel would come
    Though Italy were all fair skies to me,
  Though France's fields went mad with flowery foam
    And Blanc put on a special majesty,
  Not all could match the growing thought of home
  Nor tempt to exile. Look I not on Rome--
    This ancient, modern, mediaeval queen--
  Yet still sigh westward over hill and dome,
    Imperial ruin and villa's princely scene
    Lovely with pictured saints and marble gods serene.


REFLECTION.

  Rome, Florence, Venice--noble, fair and quaint,
    They reign in robes of magic round me here;
  But fading, blotted, dim, a picture faint,
    With spell more silent, only pleads a tear.
  Plead not! Thou hast my heart, O picture dim!
    I see the fields, I see the autumn hand
  Of God upon the maples! Answer Him
    With weird, translucent glories, ye that stand
  Like spirits in scarlet and in amethyst!
  I see the sun break over you: the mist
    On hills that lift from iron bases grand
    Their heads superb!--the dream, it is my native land.

WILLIAM DOUW SCHUYLER-LIGHTHALL.

       *       *       *       *       *




CANADA.

  O child of Nations, giant-limbed,
    Who stand'st among the nations now,
  Unheeded, unadored, unhymned,
    With unanointed brow:

  How long the ignoble sloth, how long
    The trust in greatness not thine own?
  Surely the lion's brood is strong
    To front the world alone!

  How long the indolence, ere thou dare
    Achieve thy destiny, seize thy fame;
  Ere our proud eyes behold thee bear
    A nation's franchise, nation's name?

  The Saxon force, the Celtic fire,
    These are thy manhood's heritage!
  Why rest with babes and slaves? Seek higher
    The place of race and age.

  I see to every wind unfurled
    The flag that bears the Maple-Wreath;
  Thy swift keels furrow round the world
    Its blood-red folds beneath;

  Thy swift keels cleave the furthest seas;
    Thy white sails swell with alien gales;
  To stream on each remotest breeze
    The black smoke of thy pipes exhales.

  O Falterer, let thy past convince
    Thy future: all the growth, the gain,
  The fame since Cartier knew thee, since
    Thy shores beheld Champlain!

  Montcalm and Wolfe! Wolfe and Montcalm!
    Quebec, thy storied citadel
  Attest in burning song and psalm
    How here thy heroes fell!

  O Thou that bor'st the battle's brunt
    At Queenstown, and at Lundy's Lane:
  On whose scant ranks but iron front
    The battle broke in vain!

  Whose was the danger, whose the day,
    From whose triumphant throats the cheers,
  At Chrysler's Farm, at Chateauguay,
    Storming like clarion-bursts our ears?

  On soft Pacific slopes,--beside
    Strange floods that northward rave and fall,
  Where chafes Acadia's chainless tide,--
    Thy sons await thy call.

  They wait; but some in exile, some
    With strangers housed, in stranger lands;
  And some Canadian lips are dumb
    Beneath Egyptian sands.

  O mystic Nile! Thy secret yields
    Before us; thy most ancient dreams
  Are mixed with far Canadian fields
    And murmur of Canadian streams.

  But thou, my Country, dream not thou!
    Wake, and behold how night is done,--
  How on thy breast, and o'er thy brow,
    Bursts the uprising sun!

CHARLES G.D. ROBERTS.

       *       *       *       *       *




WHAT IS THE GERMAN'S FATHERLAND?


  What is the German's fatherland?
  Is it Prussia, or the Swabian's land?
  Is it where the grape glows on the Rhine?
  Where sea-gulls skim the Baltic's brine?
      Oh no! more grand
    Must be the German's fatherland!

  What is the German's fatherland?
  Bavaria, or the Styrian's land?
  Is it where the Master's cattle graze?
  Is it the Mark where forges blaze?
      Oh no! more grand
    Must be the German's fatherland!

  What is the German's fatherland?
  Westphalia? Pomerania's strand?
  Where the sand drifts along the shore?
  Or where the Danube's surges roar?
      Oh no! more grand
    Must be the German's fatherland!

  What is the German's fatherland?
  Now name for me that mighty land!
  Is it Switzerland? or Tyrols, tell;--
  The land and people pleased me well!
      Oh no! more grand
    Must be the German's fatherland!

  What is the German's fatherland?
  Now name for me that mighty land!
  Ah! Austria surely it must be,
  So rich in fame and victory.
      Oh no! more grand
    Must be the German's fatherland!

  What is the German's fatherland?
  Tell me the name of that great land!
  Is it the land which princely hate
  Tore from the Emperor and the State?
      Oh no! more grand
    Must be the German's fatherland!

  What is the German's fatherland?
  Now name at last that mighty land!
  "Where'er resounds the German tongue,
  Where'er its hymns to God are sung!"
      That is the land,
    Brave German, that thy fatherland!

  That is the German's fatherland!
  Where binds like oak the clasped hand,
  Where truth shines clearly from the eyes,
  And in the heart affection lies.
      Be this the land,
    Brave German, this thy fatherland!

  That is the German's fatherland!
  Where scorn shall foreign trifles brand,
  Where all are foes whose deeds offend,
  Where every noble soul's a friend:
      Be this the land,
    All Germany shall be the land!

  All Germany that land shall be:
  Watch o'er it, God, and grant that we,
  With German hearts, in deed and thought,
  May love it truly as we ought.
      Be this the land,
    All Germany shall be the land!

From the German of ERNST MORITZ ARNDT.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATRIOTIC SONG.


  God, who gave iron, purposed ne'er
    That man should be a slave:
  Therefore the sabre, sword, and spear
    In his right hand He gave.
  Therefore He gave him fiery mood,
    Fierce speech, and free-born breath,
  That he might fearlessly the feud
    Maintain through life and death.

  Therefore will we what God did say,
    With honest truth maintain,
  And ne'er a fellow-creature slay,
    A tyrant's pay to gain!
  But he shall fall by stroke of brand
    Who fights for sin and shame,
  And not inherit German land
    With men of German name.

  O Germany, bright fatherland!
    O German love, so true!
  Thou sacred land, thou beauteous land,
    We swear to thee anew!
  Outlawed, each knave and coward shall
    The crow and raven feed;
  But we will to the battle all--
    Revenge shall be our meed.

  Flash forth, flash forth, whatever can,
    To bright and flaming life!
  Now all ye Germans, man for man,
    Forth to the holy strife!
  Your hands lift upward to the sky--
    Your heart shall upward soar--
  And man for man, let each one cry,
    Our slavery is o'er!

  Let sound, let sound, whatever can,
    Trumpet and fife and drum,
  This day our sabres, man for man,
    To stain with blood we come;
  With hangman's and with Frenchmen's blood,
    O glorious day of ire,
  That to all Germans soundeth good--
    Day of our great desire!

  Let wave, let wave, whatever can,
    Standard and banner wave!
  Here will we purpose, man for man,
    To grace a hero's grave.
  Advance, ye brave ranks, hardily--
    Your banners wave on high;
  We'll gain us freedom's victory,
    Or freedom's death we'll die!

From the German of ERNST MORITZ ARNDT.

       *       *       *       *       *




MEN AND BOYS


  The storm is out; the land is roused;
  Where is the coward who sits well housed?
  Fie on thee, boy, disguised in curls,
  Behind the stove, 'mong gluttons and girls!
    A graceless, worthless wight thou must be;
    No German maid desires thee,
    No German song inspires thee,
    No German Rhine-wine fires thee.
      Forth in the van,
      Man by man,
    Swing the battle-sword who can!

  When we stand watching, the livelong night,
  Through piping storms, till morning light,
  Thou to thy downy bed canst creep,
  And there in dreams of rapture sleep.
    A graceless, worthless wight, etc.

  When, hoarse and shrill, the trumpet's blast.
  Like the thunder of God, makes our heart beat fast,
  Thou in the theatre lov'st to appear,
  Where trills and quavers tickle the ear.
    A graceless, worthless wight, etc.

  When the glare of noonday scorches the brain,
  When our parched lips seek water in vain,
  Thou canst make champagne corks fly
  At the groaning tables of luxury.
    A graceless, worthless wight, etc.

  When we, as we rush to the strangling fight,
  Send home to our true-loves a long "Good-night,"
  Thou canst hie thee where love is sold,
  And buy thy pleasure with paltry gold.
    A graceless, worthless wight, etc.

  When lance and bullet come whistling by,
  And death in a thousand shapes draws nigh,
  Thou canst sit at thy cards, and kill
  King, queen, and knave with thy spadille.
    A graceless, worthless wight, etc.

  If on the red field our bell should toll,
  Then welcome be death to the patriot's soul!
  Thy pampered flesh shall quake at its doom,
  And crawl in silk to a hopeless tomb.
    A pitiful exit thine shall be;
    No German maid shall weep for thee,
    No German song shall they sing for thee,
    No German goblets shall ring for thee.
      Forth in the van,
      Man for man,
    Swing the battle-sword who can!

From the German of KARL THEODOR KOeRNER.
Translation of CHARLES TIMOTHY BROOKS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE WATCH ON THE RHINE[A]

[Footnote A: Written by a manufacturer of Wurtemburg in 1840, when
France was threatening the left bank of the Rhine. It was set to music
by Carl Wilhelm, and during the Franco-Prussian war of 1871 was
adopted as the national folk-hymn and rallying cry of the army.]

  A voice resounds like thunder-peal,
  'Mid dashing waves and clang of steel:--
  "The Rhine, the Rhine, the German Rhine!
  Who guards to-day my stream divine?"

  _Chorus.

  Dear Fatherland, no danger thine:
  Firm stand thy sons to watch the Rhine_!

  They stand, a hundred thousand strong,
  Quick to avenge their country's wrong;
  With filial love their bosoms swell,
  They'll guard the sacred landmark well!

  The dead of a heroic race
  From heaven look down and meet their gaze;
  They swear with dauntless heart, "O Rhine,
  Be German as this breast of mine!"

  While flows one drop of German blood,
  Or sword remains to guard thy flood,
  While rifle rests in patriot hand,--
  No foe shall tread thy sacred strand!

  Our oath resounds, the river flows,
  In golden light our banner glows;
  Our hearts will guard thy stream divine:
  The Rhine, the Rhine, the German Rhine!

    _Dear Fatherland, no danger thine:
    Firm stand thy sons to watch the Rhine_!

From the German of MAX SCHNECKENBURGER.

       *       *       *       *       *




PROEM.

FROM "THE KALEVALA" (_Land of heroes_), THE NATIONAL EPIC OF FINLAND.[A]

[Footnote A: Aside from its national significance "The Kalevala" is
interesting from the fact of its having been taken as the model in
rhythm and style for Longfellow's "Hiawatha," the epic of the American
Indian.]


  Mastered by desire impulsive,
  By a mighty inward urging,
  I am ready now for singing,
  Ready to begin the chanting
  Of our nation's ancient folk-song,
  Handed down from bygone ages.
  In my mouth the words are melting,
  From my lips the tones are gliding,
  From my tongue they wish to hasten;
  When my willing teeth are parted,
  When my ready mouth is opened,
  Songs of ancient wit and wisdom
  Hasten from me not unwilling.
    Golden friend, and dearest brother,
  Brother dear of mine in childhood,
  Come and sing with me the stories,
  Come and chant with me the legends,
  Legends of the times forgotten,
  Since we now are here together,
  Come together from our roamings.
  Seldom do we come for singing,
  Seldom to the one, the other,
  O'er this cold and cruel country,
  O'er the poor soil of the Northland.
  Let us clasp our hands together,
  That we thus may best remember.
  Join we now in merry singing,
  Chant we now the oldest folk-lore,
  That the dear ones all may hear them,
  That the well-inclined may hear them,
  Of this rising generation.
  These are words in childhood taught me,
  Songs preserved from distant ages;
  Legends they that once were taken
  From the belt of Wainamoinen,
  From the forge of Ilmarinen,
  From the sword of Kaukomieli,
  From the bow of Youkahainen,
  From the pastures of the Northland,
  From the meads of Kalevala.
  These my dear old father sang me
  When at work with knife and hatchet:
  These my tender mother taught me
  When she twirled the flying spindle,
  When a child upon the matting
  By her feet I rolled and tumbled.
    Incantations were not wanting
  Over Sampo and o'er Louhi,
  Sampo growing old in singing,
  Louhi ceasing her enchantment.
  In the songs died wise Wipunen,
  At the games died Lemminkainen.
  There are many other legends,
  Incantations that were taught me,
  That I found along the wayside,
  Gathered in the fragrant copses,
  Blown me from the forest branches,
  Culled among the plumes of pine-trees,
  Scented from the vines and flowers,
  Whispered to me as I followed
  Flocks in land of honeyed meadows,
  Over hillocks green and golden,
  After sable-haired Murikki,
  And the many-colored Kimmo.
  Many runes the cold has told me,
  Many lays the rain has brought me,
  Other songs the winds have sung me;
  Many birds from many forests,
  Oft have sung me lays in concord;
  Waves of sea, and ocean billows,
  Music from the many waters,
  Music from the whole creation,
  Oft have been my guide and master.
  Sentences the trees created,
  Rolled together into bundles,
  Moved them to my ancient dwelling,
  On the sledges to my cottage,
  Tied them to my garret rafters,
  Hung them on my dwelling-portals,
  Laid them in a chest of boxes,
  Boxes lined with shining copper.
  Long they lay within my dwelling
  Through the chilling winds of winter,
  In my dwelling-place for ages.
    Shall I bring these songs together?
  From the cold and frost collect them?
  Shall I bring this nest of boxes,
  Keepers of these golden legends,
  To the table in my cabin,
  Underneath the painted rafters,
  In this house renowned and ancient?
  Shall I now these boxes open,
  Boxes filled with wondrous stories?
  Shall I now the end unfasten
  Of this ball of ancient wisdom?
  These ancestral lays unravel?
  Let me sing an old-time legend,
  That shall echo forth the praises
  Of the beer that I have tasted,
  Of the sparkling beer of barley,
  Bring to me a foaming goblet
  Of the barley of my fathers,
  Lest my singing grow too weary,
  Singing from the water only.
  Bring me too a cup of strong beer;
  It will add to our enchantment,
  To the pleasure of the evening,
  Northland's long and dreary evening,
  For the beauty of the day-dawn,
  For the pleasures of the morning,
  The beginning of the new day.

From the FINNISH.
Translation of JOHN MARTIN CRAWFORD.

       *       *       *       *       *




PARTING LOVERS.

SIENNA.


  I love thee, love thee, Giulio!
    Some call me cold, and some demure,
  And if thou hast ever guessed that so
    I love thee ... well;--the proof was poor,
    And no one could be sure.

  Before thy song (with shifted rhymes
     To suit my name) did I undo
  The persian? If it moved sometimes,
    Thou hast not seen a hand push through
    A flower or two.

  My mother listening to my sleep
    Heard nothing but a sigh at night,--
  The short sigh rippling on the deep,--
    When hearts run out of breath and sigh
    Of men, to God's clear light.

  When others named thee,... thought thy brows
    Were straight, thy smile was tender,... "Here
  He comes between the vineyard-rows!"--
    I said not "Ay,"--nor waited, Dear,
    To feel thee step too near.

  I left such things to bolder girls,
    Olivia or Clotilda. Nay,
  When that Clotilda through her curls
    Held both thine eyes in hers one day,
    I marvelled, let me say.

  I could not try the woman's trick:
    Between us straightway fell the blush
  Which kept me separate, blind, and sick.
    A wind came with thee in a flush,
    As blow through Horeb's bush.

  But now that Italy invokes
    Her young men to go forth and chase
  The foe or perish,--nothing chokes
    My voice, or drives me from the place:
    I look thee in the face.

  I love thee! it is understood,
    Confest: I do not shrink or start:
  No blushes: all my body's blood
    Has gone to greaten this poor heart,
    That, loving, we may part.

  Our Italy invokes the youth
    To die if need be. Still there's room,
  Though earth is strained with dead, in truth.
    Since twice the lilies were in bloom
    They had not grudged a tomb.

  And many a plighted maid and wife
    And mother, who can say since then
  "My country," cannot say through life
    "My son," "my spouse," "my flower of men,"
    And not weep dumb again.

  Heroic males the country bears,
    But daughters give up more than sons.
  Flags wave, drums beat, and unawares
    You flash your souls out with the guns,
    And take your heaven at once!

  But we,--we empty heart and home
     Of life's life, love! we bear to think
  You're gone,... to feel you may not come,...
     To hear the door-latch stir and clink
     Yet no more you,... nor sink.

  Dear God! when Italy is one
     And perfected from bound to bound,...
  Suppose (for my share) earth's undone
     By one grave in't! as one small wound
     May kill a man, 'tis found!

  What then? If love's delight must end,
     At least we'll clear its truth from flaws.
  I love thee, love thee, sweetest friend!
     Now take my sweetest without pause,
     To help the nation's cause.

  And thus of noble Italy
     We'll both be worthy. Let her show
  The future how we made her free,
     Not sparing life, nor Giulio,
     Nor this ... this heart-break. Go!

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.

       *       *       *       *       *




AMERICA


  O mother of a mighty race,
  Yet lovely in thy youthful grace!
  The elder dames, thy haughty peers,
  Admire and hate thy blooming years;
      With words of shame
  And taunts of scorn they join thy name.

  For on thy cheeks the glow is spread
  That tints thy morning hills with red;
  Thy step,--the wild deer's rustling feet
  Within thy woods are not more fleet;
      Thy hopeful eye
  Is bright as thine own sunny sky.

  Ay, let them rail, those haughty ones,
  While safe thou dwellest with thy sons.
  They do not know how loved thou art,
  How many a fond and fearless heart
      Would rise to throw
  Its life between thee and the foe.

  They know not, in their hate and pride,
  What virtues with thy children bide,--
  How true, how good, thy graceful maids
  Make bright, like flowers, the valley shades;
      What generous men
  Spring, like thine oaks, by hill and glen;

  What cordial welcomes greet the guest
  By thy lone rivers of the west;
  How faith is kept, and truth revered,
  And man is loved, and God is feared,
      In woodland homes,
  And where the ocean border foams.

  There's freedom at thy gates, and rest
  For earth's down-trodden and opprest,
  A shelter for the hunted head,
  For the starved laborer toil and bread.
      Power, at thy bounds,
  Stops, and calls back his baffled hounds.

  O fair young mother! on thy brow
  Shall sit a nobler grace than now.
  Deep in the brightness of thy skies,
  The thronging years in glory rise,
      And, as they fleet,
  Drop strength and riches at thy feet.

  Thine eye, with every coming hour,
  Shall brighten, and thy form shall tower;
  And when thy sisters, elder born,
  Would brand thy name with words of scorn,
      Before thine eye
  Upon their lips the taunt shall die.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

       *       *       *       *       *




COLUMBIA.


  Columbia, Columbia, to glory arise,
  The queen of the world, and the child of the skies!
  Thy genius commands thee; with rapture behold,
  While ages on ages thy splendors unfold.
  Thy reign is the last and the noblest of time,
  Most fruitful thy soil, most inviting thy clime;
  Let the crimes of the East ne'er encrimson thy name,
  Be freedom and science and virtue thy fame.

  To conquest and slaughter let Europe aspire;
  Whelm nations in blood, and wrap cities in fire;
  Thy heroes the rights of mankind shall defend,
  And triumph pursue them, and glory attend.
  A world is thy realm; for a world be thy laws
  Enlarged as thine empire, and just as thy cause;
  On Freedom's broad basis that empire shall rise,
  Extend with the main, and dissolve with the skies.

  Fair Science her gates to thy sons shall unbar,
  And the East see thy morn hide the beams of her star;
  New bards and new sages unrivalled shall soar
  To fame unextinguished when time is no more;
  To thee, the last refuge of virtue designed,
  Shall fly from all nations the best of mankind;
  Here, grateful to Heaven, with transport shall bring
  Their incense, more fragrant than odors of spring.

  Nor less shall thy fair ones to glory ascend,
  And genius and beauty in harmony blend;
  The graces of form shall awake pure desire,
  And the charms of the soul ever cherish the fire;
  Their sweetness unmingled, their manners refined,
  And virtue's bright image, enstamped on the mind,
  With peace and soft rapture shall teach life to glow,
  And light up a smile on the aspect of woe.

  Thy fleets to all regions thy power shall display,
  The nations admire, and the ocean obey;
  Each shore to thy glory its tribute unfold,
  And the East and the South yield their spices and gold.
  As the dayspring unbounded thy splendor shall flow,
  And earth's little kingdoms before thee shall bow,
  While the ensigns of union, in triumph unfurled,
  Hush the tumult of war, and give peace to the world.

  Thus, as down a lone valley, with cedars o'er-spread,
  From war's dread confusion, I pensively strayed,--
  The gloom from the face of fair heaven retired;
  The wind ceased to murmur, the thunders expired;
  Perfumes, as of Eden, flowed sweetly along,
  And a voice, as of angels, enchantingly sung:
  "Columbia, Columbia, to glory arise,
  The queen of the world, and the child of the skies!"

TIMOTHY DWIGHT.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE PROSPECT OF PLANTING ARTS
AND LEARNING IN AMERICA.


  The Muse, disgusted at an age and clime
    Barren of every glorious theme,
  In distant lands now waits a better time,
    Producing subjects worthy fame.

  In happy climes, where from the genial sun
    And virgin earth such scenes ensue,
  The force of art by nature seems outdone,
    And fancied beauties by the true:

  In happy climes, the seat of innocence,
    Where nature guides and virtue rules,
  Where men shall not impose for truth and sense
    The pedantry of courts and schools:

  There shall be sung another golden age,
    The rise of empire and of arts,
  The good and great inspiring epic rage,
    The wisest heads and noblest hearts.

  Not such as Europe breeds in her decay:
    Such as she bred when fresh and young,
  When heavenly flame did animate her clay,
    By future poets shall be sung.

  Westward the course of empire takes its way;
    The first four acts already past,
  A fifth shall close the drama with the day;
    Time's noblest offspring is the last.

BISHOP GEORGE BERKELEY.

       *       *       *       *       *




ENGLAND TO AMERICA.


  Nor force nor fraud shall sunder us! O ye
    Who north or south, or east or western land,
    Native to noble sounds, say truth for truth,
  Freedom for freedom, love for love, and God
    For God; O ye who in eternal youth
    Speak with a living and creative flood
    This universal English, and do stand
    Its breathing book; live worthy of that grand
    Heroic utterance--parted, yet a whole,
      Far, yet unsevered,--children brave and free
      Of the great Mother tongue, and ye shall be
    Lords of an empire wide as Shakespeare's soul,
        Sublime as Milton's immemorial theme,
  And rich as Chaucer's speech, and fair as Spenser's dream.

SYDNEY DOBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR STATE.


  The south-land boasts its teeming cane,
  The prairied west its heavy grain,
  And sunset's radiant gates unfold
  On rising marts and sands of gold!

  Rough, bleak, and hard, our little State
  Is scant of soil, of limits strait;
  Her yellow sands are sands alone,
  Her only mines are ice and stone!

  From autumn frost to April rain,
  Too long her winter woods complain;
  From budding flower to falling leaf,
  Her summer time is all too brief.

  Yet, on her rocks, and on her sands,
  And wintry hills, the school-house stands;
  And what her rugged soil denies
  The harvest of the mind supplies.

  The riches of the commonwealth
  Are free, strong minds, and hearts of health;
  And more to her than gold or grain
  The cunning hand and cultured brain.

  For well she keeps her ancient stock,
  The stubborn strength of Pilgrim Rock;
  And still maintains, with milder laws,
  And clearer light, the good old cause!

  Nor heeds the sceptic's puny hands,
  While near her school the church-spire stands;
  Nor fears the blinded bigot's rule,
  While near her church-spire stands the school.

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE REPUBLIC.

FROM "THE BUILDING OF THE SHIP."


  Thou, too, sail on, O Ship of State!
  Sail on, O UNION, strong and great!
  Humanity with all its fears,
  With all the hopes of future years,
  Is hanging breathless on thy fate!
  We know what Master laid thy keel,
  What Workmen wrought thy ribs of steel,
  Who made each mast, and sail, and rope,
  What anvils rang, what hammers beat,
  In what a forge and what a heat
  Were shaped the anchors of thy hope!
  Fear not each sudden sound and shock,
  'Tis of the wave and not the rock;
  'Tis but the flapping of the sail,
  And not a rent made by the gale!
  In spite of rock and tempest's roar,
  In spite of false lights on the shore,
  Sail on, nor fear to breast the sea!
  Our hearts, our hopes, are all with thee,
  Our hearts, our hopes, our prayers, our tears,
  Our faith triumphant o'er our fears,
  Are all with thee,--are all with thee!

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.

       *       *       *       *       *




AMERICA

[1832.]


  My country, 'tis of thee,
  Sweet land of liberty,
      Of thee I sing;
  Land where my fathers died,
  Land of the pilgrims' pride,
  From every mountain-side
     Let freedom ring.

  My native country, thee,
  Land of the noble free,--
     Thy name I love;
  I love thy rocks and rills,
  Thy woods and templed hills;
  My heart with rapture thrills
       Like that above.

  Let music swell the breeze,
  And ring from all the trees,
     Sweet freedom's song;
  Let mortal tongues awake,
  Let all that breathe partake,
  Let rocks their silence break,--
      The sound prolong.

  Our fathers' God, to Thee,
  Author of liberty,
     To Thee I sing;
  Long may our land be bright
  With freedom's holy light;
  Protect us by thy might,
      Great God our King.

Samuel Francis Smith.

       *       *       *       *       *




"OLD IRONSIDES."

[On the proposed breaking up of the United States frigate
"Constitution."]


  Ay, tear her tattered ensign down!
   Long has it waved on high,
  And many an eye has danced to see
    That banner in the sky;
  Beneath it rung the battle-shout,
   And burst the cannon's roar:
  The meteor of the ocean air
    Shall sweep the clouds no more!

  Her deck, once red with heroes' blood,
    Where knelt the vanquished foe,
  When winds were hurrying o'er the flood
    And waves were white below,
  No more shall feel the victor's tread,
   Or know the conquered knee:
  The harpies of the shore shall pluck
    The eagle of the sea!

  O better that her shattered hulk
    Should sink beneath the wave!
  Her thunders shook the mighty deep,
    And there should be her grave:
  Nail to the mast her holy flag,
    Set every threadbare sail,
  And give her to the god of storms,
    The lightning and the gale!

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.

       *       *       *       *       *




MEN OF THE NORTH AND WEST.

[APRIL, 1861.]


  Men of the North and West,
      Wake in your might.
  Prepare, as the rebels have done,
      For the fight!
  You cannot shrink from the test;
  Rise! Men of the North and West!

  They have torn down your banner of stars;
      They have trampled the laws;
  They have stifled the freedom they hate,
      For no cause!
  Do you love it or slavery best?
  Speak! Men of the North and West!

  They strike at the life of the State:
      Shall the murder be done?
  They cry: "We are two!" And you?
      "We are one!"
  You must meet them, then, breast to breast;
  On! Men of the North and West!

  Not with words; they laugh them to scorn,
      And tears they despise;
  But with swords in your hands, and death
      In your eyes!
  Strike home! leave to God all the rest;
  Strike! Men of the North and West!

RICHARD HENRY STODDARD.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR COUNTRY'S CALL.

[1861.]


  Lay down the axe, fling by the spade;
    Leave in its track the toiling plough;
  The rifle and the bayonet-blade
    For arms like yours were fitter now;
  And let the hands that ply the pen
    Quit the light task, and learn to wield
  The horseman's crooked brand, and rein
    The charger on the battle-field.

  Our country calls; away! away!
    To where the blood-stream blots the green;
  Strike to defend the gentlest sway
    That Time in all his course has seen.
  See, from a thousand coverts--see
    Spring the armed foes that haunt her track;
  They rush to smite her down, and we
    Must beat the banded traitors back.

  Ho! sturdy as the oaks ye cleave,
    And moved as soon to fear and flight,
  Men of the glade and forest! leave
    Your woodcraft for the field of fight.
  The arms that wield the axe must pour
    An iron tempest on the foe;
  His serried ranks shall reel before
    The arm that lays the panther low.

  And ye who breast the mountain storm
    By grassy steep or highland lake,
  Come, for the land ye love, to form
    A bulwark that no foe can break.
  Stand, like your own gray cliffs that mock
    The whirlwind; stand in her defence:
  The blast as soon shall move the rock,
    As rushing squadrons bear ye thence.

  And ye whose homes are by her grand
    Swift rivers, rising far away,
  Come from the depth of her green land
    As mighty in your march as they;
  As terrible as when the rains
    Have swelled them over bank and bourne,
  With sudden floods to drown the plains
    And sweep along the woods uptorn.

  And ye who throng beside the deep,
    Her ports and hamlets of the strand,
  In number like the waves that leap
    On his long-murmuring marge of sand,
  Come, like that deep, when, o'er his brim,
    He rises, all his floods to pour,
  And flings the proudest barks that swim,
    A helpless wreck against his shore.

  Few, few were they whose swords of old
    Won the fair land in which we dwell;
  But we are many, we who hold
    The grim resolve to guard it well.
  Strike for that broad and goodly land,
    Blow after blow, till men shall see
  That Might and Right move hand in hand,
    And Glorious must their triumph be.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

       *       *       *       *       *




A CRY TO ARMS.

[1861.]


  Ho, woodsmen of the mountain-side!
    Ho, dwellers in the vales!
  Ho, ye who by the chafing tide
    Have roughened in the gales!
  Leave barn and byre, leave kin and cot,
    Lay by the bloodless spade;
  Let desk and case and counter rot,
    And burn your books of trade!

  The despot roves your fairest lands;
    And till he flies or fears,
  Your fields must grow but armed bands,
    Your sheaves be sheaves of spears!
  Give up to mildew and to rust
    The useless tools of gain,
  And feed your country's sacred dust
    With floods of crimson rain!

  Come with the weapons at your call--
    With musket, pike, or knife;
  He wields the deadliest blade of all
    Who lightest holds his life.
  The arm that drives its unbought blows
    With all a patriot's scorn,
  Might brain a tyrant with a rose
    Or stab him with a thorn.

  Does any falter? Let him turn
    To some brave maiden's eyes,
  And catch the holy fires that burn
    In those sublunar skies.
  Oh, could you like your women feel,
    And in their spirit march,
  A day might see your lines of steel
    Beneath the victor's arch!

  What hope, O God! would not grow warm
    When thoughts like these give cheer?
  The lily calmly braves the storm,
    And shall the palm-tree fear?
  No! rather let its branches court
    The rack that sweeps the plain;
  And from the lily's regal port
    Learn how to breast the strain.

  Ho, woodsmen of the mountain-side!
    Ho, dwellers in the vales!
  Ho, ye who by the roaring tide
    Have roughened in the gales!
  Come, flocking gayly to the fight,
    From forest, hill, and lake;
  We battle for our country's right,
    And for the lily's sake!

HENRY TIMROD.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE NATION'S PRAYER.

[1861].


  I.

  Before Thy Throne we bow:
  O God, our shield be Thou
    From Treason's rage!
  In faith we look to Thee,
  Our strength in Heav'n we see,
  Defender of the free,
  In ev'ry age.


  II.

  Our follies we confess:
  O God, forgive and bless!
    Let Mercy's light
  Illumine this dark hour,
  When war clouds o'er us lower,
  And Thine eternal power
    Defend the right!


  III.

  Our Pilgrim fathers sleep,
  The ocean, broad and deep,
    Beside their graves.
  When Thine archangel cries,
  Forbid that they should rise
  To crowns in Paradise
    From soil of slaves!


  IV.

  Protect our armies, Lord,
  And when they draw the sword
    In freedom's name,
  Strike Thou for them the blow,
  Overwhelm the vaunting foe,
  And bury Treason low,
    In deathless shame!


  V.

  Let Liberty arise,
  Her glory fill the skies,
    The world be free!
  Let all adore Thy name,
  And children lisp Thy fame--
  Let earth and heav'n proclaim
    The jubilee!

CRAMMOND KENNEDY.

       *       *       *       *       *




MY MARYLAND.

[1861.]


  The despot's heel is on thy shore, Maryland!
  His torch is at thy temple door, Maryland!
  Avenge the patriotic gore
  That flecked the streets of Baltimore,
  And be the battle queen of yore,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  Hark to thy wandering son's appeal, Maryland!
  My mother State, to thee I kneel, Maryland!
  For life and death, for woe and weal,
  Thy peerless chivalry reveal,
  And gird thy beauteous limbs with steel,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  Thou wilt not cower in the dust, Maryland!
  Thy beaming sword shall never rust, Maryland!
  Remember Carroll's sacred trust,
  Remember Howard's warlike thrust,
  And all thy slumberers with the just,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  Come, 'tis the red dawn of the day, Maryland!
  Come with thy panoplied array, Maryland!
  With Ringgold's spirit for the fray,
  With Watson's blood at Monterey,
  With fearless Lowe and dashing May,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  Dear mother, burst the tyrant's chain, Maryland!
  Virginia should not call in vain, Maryland!
  She meets her sisters on the plain:
  "Sic semper!" 'tis the proud refrain
  That baffles minions back amain,
      Maryland, My Maryland!

  Come, for thy shield is bright and strong, Maryland!
  Come, for thy dalliance does thee wrong, Maryland!
  Come to thine own heroic throng,
  That stalks with liberty along,
  And give a new key to thy song,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  I see the blush upon thy cheek, Maryland!
  But thou wast ever bravely meek, Maryland!
  But lo! there surges forth a shriek
  From hill to hill, from creek to creek;
  Potomac calls to Chesapeake,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  Thou wilt not yield the Vandal toll, Maryland!
  Thou wilt not crook to his control, Maryland!
  Better the fire upon thee roll,
  Better the shot, the blade, the bowl,
  Than crucifixion of the soul,
    Maryland, My Maryland!

  I hear the distant thunder hum, Maryland!
  The Old Line's bugle, fife, and drum, Maryland!
  She is not dead, nor deaf, nor dumb--
  Huzza! she spurns the Northern scum;
  She breathes, she burns--she'll come! she'll come!
    Maryland, My Maryland!

JAMES RYDER RANDALL.

       *       *       *       *       *




DIXIE.

[1861.]


  Southrons, hear your country call you!
  Up, lest worse than death befall you!
  To arms! To arms! To arms, in Dixie!
  Lo! all the beacon-fires are lighted,--
  Let all hearts be now united!
    To arms! To arms! To arms, in Dixie!
      Advance the flag of Dixie!
        Hurrah! hurrah!
  For Dixie's land we take our stand,
    And live or die for Dixie!
      To arms! To arms!
    And conquer peace for Dixie!
      To arms! To arms!
    And conquer peace for Dixie!

  Hear the Northern thunders mutter!
  Northern flags in South winds flutter!
  Send them back your fierce defiance!
  Stamp upon the accursed alliance!

  Fear no danger! Shun no labor!
  Lift up rifle, pike, and sabre!
  Shoulder pressing close to shoulder,
  Let the odds make each heart bolder!

  How the South's great heart rejoices
  At your cannons' ringing voices!
  For faith betrayed, and pledges broken,
  Wrongs inflicted, insults spoken.

  Strong as lions, swift as eagles,
  Back to their kennels hunt these beagles!
  Cut the unequal bonds asunder!
  Let them hence each other plunder!

  Swear upon your country's altar
  Never to submit or falter,
  Till the spoilers are defeated,
  Till the Lord's work is completed.

  Halt not till our Federation
  Secures among earth's powers its station!
  Then at peace, and crowned with glory,
  Hear your children tell the story!

  If the loved ones weep in sadness,
  Victory soon shall bring them gladness,--
          To arms!
  Exultant pride soon banish sorrow,
  Smiles chase tears away to-morrow.
    To arms! To arms! To arms, in Dixie!
      Advance the flag of Dixie!
         Hurrah! hurrah!
  For Dixie's land we take our stand,
  And live or die for Dixie!
    To arms! To arms!
  And conquer peace for Dixie!
    To arms! To arms!
  And conquer peace for Dixie!

ALBERT PIKE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE FLAG GOES BY.


  Hats off!
  Along the street there comes
  A blare of bugles, a ruffle of drums,
  A dash of color beneath the sky:
  Hats off!
  The flag is passing by!

  Blue and crimson and white it shines,
  Over the steel-tipped, ordered lines.
  Hats off!
  The colors before us fly;
  But more than the flag is passing by.

  Sea-fights and land-fights, grim and great,
  Fought to make and to save the State:
  Weary marches and sinking ships;
  Cheers of victory on dying lips;

  Days of plenty and years of peace;
  March of a strong land's swift increase;
  Equal justice, right and law,
  Stately honor and reverend awe;

  Sign of a nation, great and strong
  To ward her people from foreign wrong:
  Pride and glory and honor,--all
  Live in the colors to stand or fall.

  Hats off!
  Along the street there comes
  A blare of bugles, a ruffle of drums;
  And loyal hearts are beating high:
  Hats off!
  The flag is passing by!

HENRY HOLCOMB BENNETT.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BRAVE AT HOME.


  The maid who binds her warrior's sash
    With smile that well her pain dissembles,
  The while beneath her drooping lash
    One starry tear-drop hangs and trembles,
  Though Heaven alone records the tear,
    And Fame shall never know her story,
  Her heart has shed a drop as dear
    As e'er bedewed the field of glory!

  The wife who girds her husband's sword,
    Mid little ones who weep or wonder,
  And bravely speaks the cheering word,
    What though her heart be rent asunder,
  Doomed nightly in her dreams to hear
    The bolts of death around him rattle,
  Hath shed as sacred blood as e'er
    Was poured upon the field of battle!

  The mother who conceals her grief
    While to her breast her son she presses,
  Then breathes a few brave words and brief,
    Kissing the patriot brow she blesses,
  With no one but her secret God
    To know the pain that weighs upon her,
  Sheds holy blood as e'er the sod
    Received on Freedom's field of honor!

THOMAS BUCHANAN READ.

       *       *       *       *       *




II.

FREEDOM.




THE PLACE WHERE MAN SHOULD DIE.


  How little recks it where men lie,
    When once the moment's past
  In which the dim and glazing eye
    Has looked on earth its last,--
  Whether beneath the sculptured urn
    The coffined form shall rest,
  Or in its nakedness return
    Back to its mother's, breast!

  Death is a common friend or foe,
    As different men may hold,
  And at his summons each must go,
    The timid and the bold;
  But when the spirit, free and warm,
    Deserts it, as it must,
  What matter where the lifeless form
    Dissolves again to dust?

  The soldier falls 'mid corses piled
  Upon the battle-plain,
  Where reinless war-steeds gallop wild
    Above the mangled slain;
  But though his corse be grim to see,
    Hoof-trampled on the sod,
  What recks it, when the spirit free
    Has soared aloft to God?

  The coward's dying eyes may close
    Upon his downy bed,
  And softest hands his limbs compose,
    Or garments o'er them spread.
  But ye who shun the bloody fray,
    When fall the mangled brave,
  Go--strip his coffin-lid away,
    And see him in his grave!

  'Twere sweet, indeed, to close our eyes,
    With those we cherish near,
  And, wafted upwards by their sighs,
    Soar to some calmer sphere.
  But whether on the scaffold high,
    Or in the battle's van,
  The fittest place where man can die
    Is where he dies for man!

MICHAEL JOSEPH BARRY.

       *       *       *       *       *




LIBERTY.


  What man is there so bold that he should say,
  "Thus, and thus only, would I have the Sea"?
  For whether lying calm and beautiful,
  Clasping the earth in love, and throwing back
  The smile of Heaven from waves of amethyst;
  Or whether, freshened by the busy winds,
  It bears the trade and navies of the world
  To ends of use or stern activity;
  Or whether, lashed by tempests, it gives way
  To elemental fury, howls and roars
  At all its rocky barriers, in wild lust
  Of ruin drinks the blood of living things,
  And strews its wrecks o'er leagues of desolate shore,--
  Always it is the Sea, and men bow down
  Before its vast and varied majesty.

  So all in vain will timorous ones essay
  To set the metes and bounds of Liberty.
  For Freedom is its own eternal law:
  It makes its own conditions, and in storm
  Or calm alike fulfils the unerring Will.
  Let us not then despise it when it lies
  Still as a sleeping lion, while a swarm
  Of gnat-like evils hover round its head;
  Nor doubt it when in mad, disjointed times
  It shakes the torch of terror, and its cry
  Shrills o'er the quaking earth, and in the flame
  Of riot and war we see its awful form
  Rise by the scaffold, where the crimson axe
  Rings down its grooves the knell of shuddering kings.
  For ever in thine eyes, O Liberty,
  Shines that high light whereby the world is saved,
  And though thou slay us, we will trust in thee!

JOHN HAY.

       *       *       *       *       *




PATIENCE.

FROM "POEMS OF FREEDOM."


  Be patient, O be patient! Put your ear against the earth;
  Listen there how noiselessly the germ o' the seed has birth;
  How noiselessly and gently it upheaves its little way
  Till it parts the scarcely-broken ground, and the blade stands up in
          the day.

  Be patient, O be patient! the germs of mighty thought
  Must have their silent undergrowth, must underground be wrought;
  But, as sure as ever there's a Power that makes the grass appear,
  Our land shall be green with Liberty, the blade-time shall be here.

  Be patient, O be patient! go and watch the wheat-ears grow,
  So imperceptibly that ye can mark nor change nor throe:
  Day after day, day after day till the ear is fully grown;
  And then again day after day, till the ripened field is brown.

  Be patient, O be patient! though yet our hopes are green,
  The harvest-field of Freedom shall be crowned with the sunny sheen.
  Be ripening, be ripening! mature your silent way
  Till the whole broad land is tongued with fire on Freedom's harvest
          day.

WILLIAM JAMES LINTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ANTIQUITY OF FREEDOM.


    Here are old trees, tail oaks and gnarled pines,
  That stream with gray-green mosses; here the ground
  Was never trenched by spade, and flowers spring up
  Unsown, and die ungathered. It is sweet
  To linger here, among the flitting birds,
  And leaping squirrels, wandering brooks, and winds
  That shake the leaves, and scatter, as they pass,
  A fragrance from the cedars, thickly set
  With pale blue berries. In these peaceful shades--
  Peaceful, unpruned, immeasurably old--
  My thoughts go up the long dim path of years,
  Back to the earliest days of liberty.

    Oh FREEDOM! thou art not, as poets dream,
  A fair young girl, with light and delicate limbs,
  And wavy tresses gushing from the cap
  With which the Roman master crowned his slave
  When he took off the gyves. A bearded man,
  Armed to the teeth, art thou; one mailed hand
  Grasps the broad shield, and one the sword; thy brow,
  Glorious in beauty though it be, is scarred
  With tokens of old wars; thy massive limbs
  Are strong with struggling. Power at thee has launched
  His bolts, and with his lightnings smitten thee;
  They could not quench the life thou hast from heaven.
  Merciless power has dug thy dungeon deep,
  And his swart armorers, by a thousand fires,
  Have forged thy chain; yet, while he deems thee bound,
  The links are shivered, and the prison walls
  Fall outward: terribly thou springest forth,
  As springs the flame above a burning pile,
  And shoutest to the nations, who return
  Thy shoutings, while the pale oppressor flies.

    Thy birthright was not given by human hands:
  Thou wert twin-born with man. In pleasant fields,
  While yet our race was few, thou sat'st with him,
  To tend the quiet flock and watch the stars,
  And teach the reed to utter simple airs.
  Thou by his side, amid the tangled wood,
  Didst war upon the panther and the wolf,
  His only foes; and thou with him didst draw
  The earliest furrows on the mountain side,
  Soft with the deluge. Tyranny himself,
  Thy enemy, although of reverend look,
  Hoary with many years, and far obeyed,
  Is later born than thou; and as he meets
  The grave defiance of thine elder eye,
  The usurper trembles in his fastnesses.

    Thou shalt wax stronger with the lapse of years,
  But he shall fade into a feebler age;
  Feebler, yet subtler. He shall weave his snares,
  And spring them on thy careless steps, and clap
  His withered hands, and from their ambush call
  His hordes to fall upon thee. He shall send
  Quaint maskers, forms of fair and gallant mien,
  To catch thy gaze, and uttering graceful words
  To charm thy ear; while his sly imps, by stealth,
  Twine around thee threads of steel, light thread on thread,
  That grow to fetters; or bind down thy arms
  With chains concealed in chaplets. Oh! not yet
  May'st thou unbrace thy corselet, nor lay by
  Thy sword; nor yet, O Freedom! close thy lids
  In slumber; for thine enemy never sleeps,
  And thou must watch and combat till the day
  Of the new earth and heaven. But wouldst thou rest
  Awhile from tumult and the frauds of men,
  These old and friendly solitudes invite
  Thy visit. They, while yet the forest trees
  Were young upon the unviolated earth,
  And yet the moss-stains on the rock were new,
  Beheld thy glorious childhood, and rejoiced.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

       *       *       *       *       *




HALLOWED GROUND.


  What's hallowed ground? Has earth a clod
  Its Maker meant not should be trod
  By man, the image of his God,
    Erect and free,
  Unscourged by Superstition's rod
    To bow the knee?

  That's hallowed ground where, mourned and missed,
  The lips repose our love has kissed;--
  But where's their memory's mansion? Is't
    Yon churchyard's bowers?
  No! in ourselves their souls exist,
    A part of ours.

  A kiss can consecrate the ground
  Where mated hearts are mutual bound:
  The spot where love's first links were wound,
    That ne'er are riven,
  Is hallowed down to earth's profound,
    And up to heaven!

  For time makes all but true love old;
  The burning thoughts that then were told
  Run molten still in memory's mould;
    And will not cool
  Until the heart itself be cold
    In Lethe's pool.

  What hallows ground where heroes sleep?
  'Tis not the sculptured piles you heap!
  In dews that heavens far distant weep
      Their turf may bloom;
  Or Genii twine beneath the deep
      Their coral tomb.

  But strew his ashes to the wind
  Whose sword or voice has served mankind,--
  And is he dead, whose glorious mind
    Lifts thine on high?--
  To live in hearts we leave behind
    Is not to die.

  Is't death to fall for Freedom's right?
  He's dead alone that lacks her light!
  And murder sullies in heaven's sight
    The sword he draws:--
  What can alone ennoble fight?
    A noble cause!

  Give that,--and welcome War to brace
  Her drums, and rend heaven's reeking space!
  The colors planted face to face,
    The charging cheer,
  Though Death's pale horse lead on the chase,
    Shall still be dear.

  And place our trophies where men kneel
  To Heaven!--but Heaven rebukes my zeal!
  The cause of Truth and human weal,
    O God above!
  Transfer it from the sword's appeal
    To Peace and Love.

  Peace, Love! the cherubim, that join
  Their spread wings o'er Devotion's shrine,
  Prayers sound in vain, and temples shine,
    Where they are not,--
  The heart alone can make divine
    Religion's spot.

  To incantations dost thou trust,
  And pompous rites in domes august?
  See mouldering stones and metal's rust
    Belie the vaunt,
  That man can bless one pile of dust
    With chime or chant.

  The ticking wood-worm mocks thee, man!
  Thy temples,--creeds themselves grow wan!
  But there's a dome of nobler span,
    A temple given
  Thy faith, that bigots dare not ban,--
    Its space is heaven!

  Its roof, star-pictured Nature's ceiling,
  Where, trancing the rapt spirit's feeling,
  And God himself to man revealing,
    The harmonious spheres
  Make music, though unheard their pealing
    By mortal ears.

  Fair stars! are not your beings pure?
  Can sin, can death, your worlds obscure?
  Else why so swell the thoughts at your
    Aspect above?
  Ye must be heavens that make us sure
    Of heavenly love!

  And in your harmony sublime
  I read the doom of distant time;
  That man's regenerate soul from crime
    Shall yet be drawn,
  And reason on his mortal clime
    Immortal dawn.

  What's hallowed ground? 'Tis what gives birth
  To sacred thoughts in souls of worth!--
  Peace! Independence! Truth! go forth
    Earth's compass round;
  And your high-priesthood shall make earth
    _All hallowed ground_.

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE WOLF AND THE DOG.


  A prowling wolf, whose shaggy skin
  (So strict the watch of dogs had been)
    Hid little but his bones,
  Once met a mastiff dog astray.
  A prouder, fatter, sleeker Tray
    No human mortal owns.
      Sir Wolf, in famished plight,
    Would fain have made a ration
    Upon his fat relation:
      But then he first must fight;
    And well the dog seemed able
    To save from wolfish table
      His carcass snug and tight.
  So then in civil conversation
  The wolf expressed his admiration
  Of Tray's fine case. Said Tray politely,
  "Yourself, good sir, may be as sightly;
  Quit but the woods, advised by me:
  For all your fellows here, I see,
  Are shabby wretches, lean and gaunt,
  Belike to die of haggard want.
  With such a pack, of course it follows,
  One fights for every bit he swallows.
    Come then with me, and share
  On equal terms our princely fare."
      "But what with you
      Has one to do?"
  Inquires the wolf. "Light work indeed,"
  Replies the dog: "you only need
  To bark a little now and then,
  To chase off duns and beggar-men,
  To fawn on friends that come or go forth,
  Your master please, and so forth;
    For which you have to eat
    All sorts of well-cooked meat--
  Cold pullets, pigeons, savory messes--
  Besides unnumbered fond caresses."
    The wolf, by force of appetite,
    Accepts the terms outright,
    Tears glistened in his eyes;
    But faring on, he spies
  A galled spot on the mastiff's neck.
  "What's that?" he cries. "Oh, nothing but a speck."
  "A speck?"--"Ay, ay: 'tis not enough to pain me:
  Perhaps the collar's mark by which they chain me."
    "Chain! chain you! What! run you not, then,
        Just where you please and when?"
      "Not always, sir; but what of that?"
      "Enough for me, to spoil your fat!
      It ought to be a precious price
      Which could to servile chains entice;
      For me, I'll shun them while I've wit."
      So ran Sir Wolf, and runneth yet.

From the French of JEAN DE LA FONTAINE.

Translation of ELIZUR WRIGHT.

       *       *       *       *       *




RIENZI TO THE ROMANS.

FROM "RIENZI."


                                     Friends!
  I come not here to talk. Ye know too well
  The story of our thraldom. We are slaves!
  The bright sun rises to his course, and lights
  A race of slaves! he sets, and his last beam
  Falls on a slave! Not such as, swept along
  By the full tide of power, the conqueror leads
  To crimson glory and undying fame,
  But base, ignoble slaves!--slaves to a horde
  Of petty tyrants, feudal despots; lords
  Rich in some dozen paltry villages,
  Strong in some hundred spearmen, only great
  In that strange spell,--a name! Each hour, dark fraud,
  Or open rapine, or protected murder,
  Cries out against them. But this very day
  An honest man, my neighbor (_pointing to_ PAOLO),
      --there he stands,--
  Was struck--struck like a dog--by one who wore
  The badge of Ursini! because, forsooth,
  He tossed not high his ready cap in air,
  Nor lifted up his voice in servile shouts,
  At sight of that great ruffian! Be we men,
  And suffer such dishonor? men, and wash not
  The stain away in blood? Such shames are common.
  I have known deeper wrongs. I, that speak to ye,
  I had a brother once, a gracious boy,
  Full of all gentleness, of calmest hope,
  Of sweet and quiet joy; there was the look
  Of Heaven upon his face which limners give
  To the beloved disciple. How I loved
  That gracious boy! younger by fifteen years,
  Brother at once and son! He left my side;
  A summer bloom on his fair cheeks, a smile
  Parting his innocent lips. In one short hour
  The pretty, harmless boy was slain! I saw
  The corse, the mangled corse, and then I cried
  For vengeance! Rouse ye, Romans! Rouse ye, slaves!
  Have ye brave sons?--Look in the next fierce brawl
  To see them die! Have ye fair daughters?--Look
  To see them live, torn from your arms, distained.
  Dishonored; and, if ye dare call for justice,
  Be answered by the lash! Yet this is Rome,
  That sat on her seven hills, and from her throne
  Of beauty ruled the world! Yet we are Romans!
  Why, in that elder day, to be a Roman
  Was greater than a king! And once again--
  Hear me, ye walls, that echoed to the tread
  Of either Brutus!--once again, I swear,
  The eternal city shall be free; her sons shall walk with princes.

MARY RUSSELL MITFORD.

       *       *       *       *       *




FALLEN GREECE.

FROM "THE GIAOUR."


  Clime of the unforgotten brave!
  Whose land, from plain to mountain-cave,
  Was Freedom's home or Glory's grave!
  Shrine of the mighty! can it be
  That this is all remains of thee?
  Approach, thou craven, crouching slave;
    Say, is not this Thermopylae?
  These waters blue that round you lave,
    O servile offspring of the free,--
  Pronounce what sea, what shore is this?
  The gulf, the rock of Salamis!
  These scenes, their story not unknown,
  Arise, and make again your own;
  Snatch from the ashes of your sires
  The embers of their former fires;
  And he who in the strife expires
  Will add to theirs a name of fear
  That Tyranny shall quake to hear,
  And leave his sons a hope, a fame,
  They too will rather die than shame;
  For Freedom's battle once begun,
  Bequeathed by bleeding sire to son,
  Though baffled oft is ever won.
  Hear witness, Greece, thy living page;
  Attest it, many a deathless age:
  While kings, in dusty darkness hid,
  Have left a nameless pyramid,
  Thy heroes, though the general doom
  Hath swept the column from their tomb,
  A mightier monument command,
  The mountains of their native land!
  There points thy Muse to stranger's eye
  The graves of those that cannot die!
  'Twere long to tell, and sad to trace,
  Each step from splendor to disgrace:
  Enough,--no foreign foe could quell
  Thy soul, till from itself it fell;
  Yes! self-abasement paved the way
  To villain-bonds and despot sway.

  What can he tell who treads thy shore?
    No legend of thine olden time,
  No theme on which the Muse might soar,
  High as thine own in days of yore,
    When man was worthy of thy clime.
  The hearts within thy valleys bred,
  The fiery souls that might have led
    Thy sons to deeds sublime,
  Now crawl from cradle to the grave,
  Slaves--nay, the bondsmen of a slave,
    And callous save to crime.

LORD BYRON.

       *       *       *       *       *




GREECE ENSLAVED.

FROM "CHILDE HAROLD" CANTO II.


    Fair Greece! sad relic of departed worth!
    Immortal, though no more; though fallen, great!
    Who now shall lead thy scattered children forth,
    And long-accustomed bondage uncreate?
    Not such thy sons who whilom did await,
    The hopeless warriors of a willing doom,
    In bleak Thermopylae's sepulchral strait,--
    O, who that gallant spirit shall resume,
  Leap from Eurotas' banks, and call thee from the tomb?

    Spirit of Freedom! when on Phyle's brow
    Thou sat'st with Thrasybulus and his train,
    Couldst thou forebode the dismal hour which now
    Dims the green beauties of thine Attic plain?
    Not thirty tyrants now enforce the chain,
    But every earle can lord it o'er thy land;
    Nor rise thy sons, but idly rail in vain,
    Trembling beneath the scourge of Turkish hand,
  From birth till death enslaved; in word, in deed, unmanned.

    In all save form alone, how changed! and who
    That marks the fire still sparkling in each eye,
    Who but would deem their bosoms burned anew
    With thy unquenched beam, lost liberty!
    And many dream withal the hour is nigh
    That gives them back their fathers' heritage;
    For foreign arms and aid they fondly sigh,
    Nor solely dare encounter hostile rage,
  Or tear their name defiled from Slavery's mournful page.

    Hereditary bondsmen! know ye not,
    Who would be free themselves must strike the blow?
    By their right arms the conquest must be wrought?
    Will Gaul or Muscovite redress ye? No!
    True, they may lay your proud despoilers low,
    But not for you will Freedom's altars flame.
    Shades of the Helots! triumph o'er your foe!
    Greece! change thy lords, thy state is still the same;
  Thy glorious day is o'er, but not thy years of shame!

    And yet how lovely in thine age of woe,
    Land of lost gods and godlike men, art thou!
    Thy vales of evergreen, thy hills of snow,
    Proclaim thee Nature's varied favorite now.
    Thy fanes, thy temples to thy surface bow,
    Commingling slowly with heroic earth.
    Broke by the share of every rustic plough:
    So perish monuments of mortal birth.
  So perish all in turn, save well-recorded worth;

    Save where some solitary column mourns
    Above its prostrate brethren of the cave;
    Save where Tritonia's airy shrine adorns
    Colonna's cliff, and gleams along the wave;
    Save o'er some warrior's half-forgotten grave,
    Where the gray stones and long-neglected grass
    Ages, but not oblivion, feebly brave,
    While strangers only not regardless pass,
  Lingering like me, perchance, to gaze, and sigh
      "Alas!"

    Yet are thy skies as blue, thy crags as wild,
    Sweet are thy groves, and verdant are thy fields,
    Thine olive ripe as when Minerva smiled,
    And still his honeyed wealth Hymettus yields;
    There the blithe bee his fragrant fortress builds,
    The free-born wanderer of thy mountain air;
    Apollo still thy long, long summer gilds,
    Still in his beam Mendeli's marbles glare:
  Art, Glory, Freedom fail, but Nature still is fair.

    Where'er we tread, 'tis haunted, holy ground;
    No earth of thine is lost in vulgar mould,
    But one vast realm of wonder spreads around,
    And all the Muse's tales seem truly told,
    Till the sense aches with gazing to behold
    The scenes our earliest dreams have dwelt upon:
    Each hill and dale, each deepening glen and wold,
    Defies the power which crushed thy temples gone:
  Age shakes Athena's tower, but spares gray Marathon.

LORD BYRON.

       *       *       *       *       *




SONG OF THE GREEK POET.

FROM "DON JUAN," CANTO III.


  The isles of Greece, the isles of Greece!
    Where burning Sappho loved and sung,
  Where grew the arts of war and peace,
    Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!
  Eternal summer gilds them yet;
  But all, except their sun, is set.

  The Scian and the Teian muse,
    The hero's harp, the lover's lute,
  Have found the fame your shores refuse;
    Their place of birth alone is mute
  To sounds which echo further west
  Than your sires' Islands of the Blest.

  The mountains look on Marathon,
    And Marathon looks on the sea:
  And musing there an hour alone,
    I dreamed that Greece might still be free;
  For, standing on the Persians' grave,
  I could not deem myself a slave.

  A king sat on the rocky brow
    Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis;
  And ships, by thousands, lay below,
    And men in nations--all were his!
  He counted them at break of day--
  And when the sun set, where were they?

  And where are they? and where art thou,
    My country? On thy voiceless shore
  The heroic lay is tuneless now,
    The heroic bosom beats no more!
  And must thy lyre, so long divine,
  Degenerate into hands like mine?

  'Tis something in the dearth of fame,
    Though linked among a fettered race,
  To feel at least a patriot's shame,
    Even as I sing, suffuse my face;
  For what is left the poet here?
  For Greeks a blush--for Greece a tear.

  Must we but weep o'er days more blest?
    Must we but blush? Our fathers bled.
  Earth! render back from out thy breast
    A remnant of our Spartan dead!
  Of the three hundred grant but three,
  To make a new Thermopylae!

  What! silent still? and silent all?
    Ah no!--the voices of the dead
  Sound like a distant torrent's fall,
    And answer, "Let one living head,
  But one, arise--we come, we come!"
  'Tis but the living who are dumb.

  In vain,--in vain; strike other chords;
    Fill high the cup with Samian wine!
  Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,
    And shed the blood of Scio's vine!
  Hark! rising to the ignoble call,
  How answers each bold Bacchanal!

  You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet,--
    Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?
  Of two such lessons, why forget
    The nobler and the manlier one?
  You have the letters Cadmus gave,--
  Think ye he meant them for a slave?

  Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
    We will not think of themes like these!
  It made Anacreon's song divine:
    He served, but served Polycrates,--
  A tyrant; but our masters then
  Were still, at least, our countrymen.

  The tyrant of the Chersonese
    Was freedom's best and bravest friend;
  That tyrant was Miltiades!
    O that the present hour would lend
  Another despot of the kind!
  Such chains as his were sure to bind.

  Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
    On Suli's rock and Parga's shore
  Exists the remnant of a line
    Such as the Doric mothers bore;
  And there perhaps some seed is sown
  The Heracleidan blood might own.

  Trust not for freedom to the Franks,--
    They have a king who buys and sells:
  In native swords, and native ranks,
    The only hope of courage dwells;
  But Turkish force, and Latin fraud,
  Would break your shield, however broad.

  Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
    Our virgins dance beneath the shade,--
  see their glorious black eyes shine;
    But, gazing on each glowing maid,
  My own the burning tear-drop laves,
  To think such breasts must suckle slaves.

  Place me on Sunium's marbled steep,
    Where nothing, save the waves and I,
  May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;
    There, swan-like, let me sing and die.
  A land of slaves shall ne'er be mine,--
  Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!

LORD BYRON.

       *       *       *       *       *




TO ALTHEA FROM PRISON.


  When Love with unconfined wings
    Hovers within my gates,
  And by divine Althea brings
    To whisper at my grates;
  When I lie tangled in her hair
    And fettered with her eye,
  The birds that wanton in the air
    Know no such liberty.

  When flowing cups pass swiftly round
    With no allaying Thames,
  Our careless heads with roses crowned,
    Our hearts with loyal flames;
  When thirsty grief in wine we steep,
    When healths and draughts go free,
  Fishes that tipple in the deep
    Know no such liberty.

  When, like committed linnets, I
    With shriller throat shall sing
  The mercy, sweetness, majesty
    And glories of my King;
  When I shall voice aloud, how good
    He is, how great should be,
  Enlarged winds that curl the flood
    Know no such liberty.

  Stone walls do not a prison make,
    Nor iron bars a cage;
  Minds innocent and quiet take
    That for an hermitage:
  If I have freedom in my love,
    And in my soul am free,
  Angels alone, that soar above,
    Enjoy such liberty.

RICHARD LOVELACE.

       *       *       *       *       *




SLAVERY.

FROM "THE TIMEPIECE": "THE TASK," BK. II.


    O for a lodge in some vast wilderness,
  Some boundless contiguity of shade,
  Where rumor of oppression and deceit,
  Of unsuccessful or successful war,
  Might never reach me more! My ear is pained,
  My soul is sick, with every day's report
  Of wrong and outrage with which earth is filled.
  There is no flush in man's obdurate heart;
  It does not feel for man; the natural bond
  Of brotherhood is served as the flax,
  That falls asunder at the touch of fire.
  He finds his fellow guilty of a skin
  Not colored like his own, and, having power
  To enforce the wrong, for such a worthy cause
  Dooms and devotes him as his lawful prey.
  Lands intersected by a narrow frith
  Abhor each other. Mountains interposed
  Make enemies of nations, who had else
  Like kindred drops been mingled into one.
  Thus man devotes his brother, and destroys;
  And, worse than all, and most to be deplored
  As human nature's broadest, foulest blot,
  Chains him, and tasks him, and exacts his sweat
  With stripes, that Mercy, with a bleeding heart,
  Weeps, when she sees inflicted on a beast.
  Then what is man? And what man, seeing this,
  And having human feelings, does not blush,
  And hang his head, to think himself a man?
  I would not have a slave to till my ground,
  To carry me, to fan me while I sleep,
  And tremble when I wake, for all the wealth
  That sinews bought and sold have ever earned.
  No; dear as freedom is, and in my heart's
  Just estimation prized above all price,
  I had much rather be myself the slave,
  And wear the bonds, than fasten them on him.
  We have no slaves at home.--Then why abroad?
  And they themselves, once ferried o'er the wave
  That parts us, are emancipate and loosed.
  Slaves cannot breathe in England; if their lungs
  Receive our air, that moment they are free;
  They touch our country, and their shackles fall.
  That's noble, and bespeaks a nation proud
  And jealous of the blessing. Spread it then,
  And let it circulate through every vein
  Of all your empire; that, where Britain's power
  Is felt, mankind may feel her mercy too.

WILLIAM COWPER.

       *       *       *       *       *




SONG OF THE WESTERN MEN.

[After the English Revolution of 1688, all bishops were compelled to
swear allegiance to William and Mary. Seven of them, adherents of
James II., refused and were imprisoned for treason,--the "Non-Jurors."
Trelawney of Cornwall was one.]


  A good sword and a trusty hand,
    A merry heart and true,
  King James's men shall understand
    What Cornish lads can do.
  And have they fixed the where and when,
    And shall Trelawney die?
  Then twenty thousand Cornish men
    Will know the reason why.
  _What! will they scorn Tre, Pol, and Pen?
    And shall Trelawney die?
  Then twenty thousand under ground
    Will know the reason why_.

  Out spake the captain brave and bold,
    A merry wight was he:
  "Though London's Tower were Michael's hold,
    We'll set Trelawney free.
  We'll cross the Tarnar hand to hand,
    The Exe shall be no stay;
  We'll side by side from strand to strand,
    And who shall bid us nay?
  _What! will they scorn Tre, Pol, and Pen?
    And shall Trelawney die?
  Then twenty thousand Cornish men
    Will know the reason why_.

  "And when we come to London wall
    We'll shout with it in view,
  'Come forth, come forth, ye cowards all!
    We're better men than you!
  Trelawney, he's in keep and hold,
    Trelawney, he may die;
  But here's twenty thousand Cornish bold
    Will know the reason why!'
  _What! will they scorn Tre, Pol, and Pen?
    And shall Trelawney die?
  Then twenty thousand under ground
    Will know the reason why_."

ROBERT STEPHEN HAWKER.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HARP THAT ONCE THROUGH TARA'S HALLS.


  The harp that once through Tara's halls
    The soul of music shed,
  Now hangs as mute on Tara's walls
    As if that soul were fled.
  So sleeps the pride of former days,
    So glory's thrill is o'er,
  And hearts that once beat high for praise
    Now feel that pulse no more!

  No more to chiefs and ladies bright
    The harp of Tara swells;
  The chord alone that breaks at night
    Its tale of ruin tells.
  Thus Freedom now so seldom wakes,
    The only throb she gives
  Is when some heart indignant breaks,
    To show that still she lives.

THOMAS MOORE.

       *       *       *       *       *




AS BY THE SHORE AT BREAK OF DAY.


  As by the shore, at break of day,
  A vanquished chief expiring lay,
  Upon the sands, with broken sword,
    He traced his farewell to the free;
  And there the last unfinished word
    He dying wrote, was "Liberty!"

  At night a sea-bird shrieked the knell
  Of him who thus for freedom fell:
  The words he wrote, ere evening came,
    Were covered by the sounding sea;--
  So pass away the cause and name
    Of him who dies for liberty!

THOMAS MOORE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HILLS WERE MADE FOR FREEDOM.


  When freedom from her home was driven,
    'Mid vine-clad vales of Switzerland,
  She sought the glorious Alps of heaven,
  And there, 'mid cliffs by lightnings riven,
    Gathered her hero-band.

  And still outrings her freedom-song,
    Amid the glaciers sparkling there,
  At Sabbath bell, as peasants throng
  Their mountain fastnesses along,
    Happy, and free as air.

  The hills were made for freedom; they
    Break at a breath the tyrant's rod;
  Chains clank in valleys; there the prey
  Writhes 'neath Oppression's heel alway:
    Hills bow to none but God!

WILLIAM GOLDSMITH BROWN.

       *       *       *       *       *




SWITZERLAND.

FROM "WILLIAM TELL."


    Once Switzerland was free! With what a pride
  I used to walk these hills,--look up to heaven,
  And bless God that it was so! It was free
  From end to end, from cliff to lake 'twas free!
  Free as our torrents are, that leap our rocks,
  And plough our valleys, without asking leave;
  Or as our peaks, that wear their caps of snow
  In very presence of the regal sun!
  How happy was I in it then! I loved
  Its very storms. Ay, often have I sat
  In my boat at night, when, midway o'er the lake,
  The stars went out, and down the mountain gorge
  The wind came roaring,--I have sat and eyed
  The thunder breaking from his cloud, and smiled
  To see him shake his lightnings o'er my head,
  And think--I had no master save his own!

JAMES SHERIDAN KNOWLES.

       *       *       *       *       *




MAKE WAY FOR LIBERTY!

[Battle of Sempach, fourteenth century.]


    "Make way for Liberty!"--he cried;
  Made way for Liberty, and died!
    In arms the Austrian phalanx stood,
  A living wall, a human wood!
  A wall, where every conscious stone
  Seemed to its kindred thousands grown;
  A rampart all assaults to bear,
  Till time to dust their frames should wear;
  A wood like that enchanted grove
  In which with fiends Rinaldo strove,
  Where every silent tree possessed
  A spirit prisoned in its breast,
  Which the first stroke of coming strife
  Would startle into hideous life:
  So dense, so still, the Austrians stood,
  A living wall, a human wood!
  Impregnable their front appears,
  All horrent with projected spears,
  Whose polished points before them shine,
  From flank to flank, one brilliant line,
  Bright as the breakers' splendors run
  Along the billows to the sun.

    Opposed to these, a hovering band
  Contended for their native land:
  Peasants, whose new-found strength had broke
  From manly necks the ignoble yoke,
  And forged their fetters into swords,
  On equal terms to fight their lords,
  And what insurgent rage had gained
  In many a mortal fray maintained:
  Marshalled once more at Freedom's call,
  They came to conquer or to fall,
  Where he who conquered, he who fell,
  Was deemed a dead, or living, Tell!
  Such virtues had that patriot breathed,
  So to the soil his soul bequeathed,
  That wheresoe'er his arrows flew
  Heroes in his own likeness grew,
  And warriors sprang from every sod
  Which his awakening footstep trod.

    And now the work of life and death
  Hung on the passing of a breath;
  The fire of conflict burned within,
  The battle trembled to begin:
  Yet, while the Austrians held their ground,
  Point for attack was nowhere found;
  Where'er the impatient Switzers gazed,
  The unbroken line of lances blazed:
  That line 'twere suicide to meet,
  And perish at their tyrants' feet,--
  How could they rest within their graves,
  And leave their homes the homes of slaves?
  Would they not feel their children tread
  With clanging chains above their head?

    It must not be: this day, this hour,
  Annihilates the oppressor's power;
  All Switzerland is in the field,
  She will not fly, she cannot yield,--
  She must not fall; her better fate
  Here gives her an immortal date.
  Few were the numbers she could boast;
  But every freeman was a host,
  And felt as though himself were he
  On whose sole arm hung victory.

    It did depend on _one_ indeed;
  Behold him,--Arnold Winkelried!
  There sounds not to the trump of fame
  The echo of a nobler name.

  Unmarked he stood amid the throng,
  In rumination deep and long,
  Till you might see, with sudden grace,
  The very thought come o'er his face,
  And by the motion of his form
  Anticipate the bursting storm,
  And by the uplifting of his brow
  Tell where the bolt would strike, and how.

    But ' twas no sooner thought than done,
  The field was in a moment won:--

    "Make way for Liberty!" he cried,
  Then ran, with arms extended wide,
  As if his dearest friend to clasp;
  Ten spears he swept within his grasp.

    "Make way for Liberty!" he cried;
  Their keen points met from side to side;
  He bowed amongst them like a tree,
  And thus made way for Liberty.

    Swift to the breach his comrades fly;
  "Make way for Liberty!" they cry,
  And through the Austrian phalanx dart,
  As rushed the spears through Arnold's heart;
  While, instantaneous as his fall,
  Rout, ruin, panic, scattered all:
  An earthquake could not overthrow
  A city with a surer blow.

    Thus Switzerland again was free;
  Thus Death made way for Liberty!

JAMES MONTGOMERY.

       *       *       *       *       *




POLAND.

FROM "THE PLEASURES OF HOPE," PART I.

  O sacred Truth! thy triumph ceased awhile,
  And Hope, thy sister, ceased with thee to smile,
  When leagued Oppression poured to Northern wars
  Her whiskered pandours and her fierce hussars,
  Waved her dread standard to the breeze of morn,
  Pealed her loud drum, and twanged her trumpet horn;
  Tumultuous horror brooded o'er her van,
  Presaging wrath to Poland--and to man!
    Warsaw's last champion from her height surveyed,
  Wide o'er the fields, a waste of ruin laid;
  "O Heaven!" he cried, "my bleeding country save!--
  Is there no hand on high to shield the brave?
  Yet, though destruction sweep these lovely plains,
  Rise, fellow-men! our country yet remains!
  By that dread name, we wave the sword on high,
  And swear for her to live--with her to die!"
    He said, and on the rampart-heights arrayed
  His trusty warriors, few, but undismayed;
  Firm-paced and slow, a horrid front they form,
  Still as the breeze, but dreadful as the storm;
  Low murmuring sounds along their banners fly,
  Revenge, or death,--the watchword and reply;
  Then pealed the notes, omnipotent to charm,
  And the loud tocsin tolled their last alarm!--
    In vain, alas! in vain, ye gallant few!
  From rank to rank your volleyed thunder flew:--
  O, bloodiest picture in the book of Time!
  Sarmatia fell, unwept, without a crime;
  Found not a generous friend, a pitying foe,
  Strength in her arms, nor mercy in her woe!
  Dropped from her nerveless grasp the shattered spear,
  Closed her bright eye, and curbed her high career;
  Hope, for a season, bade the world farewell,
  And Freedom shrieked--as Kosciusko fell!

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MARSEILLAISE.


  Ye sons of freedom, wake to glory!
    Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise!
  Your children, wives, and grandsires hoary,
    Behold their tears and hear their cries!
  Shall hateful tyrants, mischiefs breeding,
      With hireling hosts, a ruffian band,
      Affright and desolate the land,
  While peace and liberty lie bleeding?
      To arms! to arms! ye brave!
        The avenging sword unsheathe;
      March on! march on! all hearts resolved
        On victory or death.

  Now, now the dangerous storm is rolling,
    Which treacherous kings confederate raise;
  The dogs of war, let loose, are howling,
    And lo! our fields and cities blaze;
  And shall we basely view the ruin,
      While lawless force, with guilty stride,
      Spreads desolation far and wide,
  With crimes and blood his hands imbruing?
        To arms! to arms! ye brave, etc.

  O Liberty! can man resign thee,
    Once having felt thy generous flame?
  Can dungeons, bolts, or bars confine thee?
    Or whips thy noble spirit tame?
  Too long the world has wept, bewailing
      That falsehood's dagger tyrants wield,
      But freedom is our sword and shield,
  And all their arts are unavailing.
        To arms! to arms! ye brave, etc.

From the French of CLAUDE JOSEPH ROUGET DE LISLE.

       *       *       *       *       *




A COURT LADY.


  Her hair was tawny with gold, her eyes with purple were dark,
  Her cheeks' pale opal burnt with a red and restless spark.

  Never was lady of Milan nobler in name and in race;
  Never was lady of Italy fairer to see in the face.

  Never was lady on earth more true as woman and wife,
  Larger in judgment and instinct, prouder in manners and life.

  She stood in the early morning, and said to her maidens, "Bring
  That silken robe made ready to wear at the court of the king.

  "Bring me the clasps of diamonds, lucid, clear of the mote,
  Clasp me the large at the waist, and clasp me the small at the throat.

  "Diamonds to fasten the hair, and diamonds to fasten the sleeves,
  Laces to drop from their rays, like a powder of snow from the eaves."

  Gorgeous she entered the sunlight which gathered her up in a flame,
  While straight, in her open carriage, she to the hospital came.

  In she went at the door, and gazing, from end to end,
  "Many and low are the pallets, but each is the place of a friend."

  Up she passed through the wards, and stood at a young man's bed:
  Bloody the band on his brow, and livid the droop of his head.

  "Art thou a Lombard, my brother? Happy art thou!" she cried,
  And smiled like Italy on him: he dreamed in her face and died.

  Pale with his passing soul, she went on still to a second:
  _He_ was a grave, hard man, whose years by dungeons were reckoned.

  Wounds in his body were sore, wounds in his life were sorer.
  "Art thou a Romagnole?" Her eyes drove lightnings before her.

  "Austrian and priest had joined to double and tighten the cord
  Able to bind thee, O strong one,--free by the stroke of a sword.

  "Now be grave for the rest of us, using the life overcast
  To ripen our wine of the present (too new) in glooms of the past."

  Down she stepped to a pallet where lay a face like a girl's,
  Young, pathetic with dying,--a deep black hole in the curls.

  "Art thou from Tuscany, brother? and seest thou, dreaming in pain,
  Thy mother stand in the piazza, searching the list of the slain?"

  Kind as a mother herself, she touched his cheeks with her hands:
  "Blessed is she who has borne thee, although she should weep as she
          stands."

  On she passed to a Frenchman, his arm carried off by a ball:
  Kneeling,... "O more than my brother! how shall I thank thee for all?

  "Each of the heroes round us has fought for his land and line,
  But _thou_ hast fought for a stranger, in hate of a wrong not thine.

  "Happy are all free peoples, too strong to be dispossessed;
  But blessed are those among nations who dare to be strong for the
          rest!"

  Ever she passed on her way, and came to a couch where pined
  One with a face from Venetia, white with a hope out of mind.

  Long she stood and gazed, and twice she tried at the name,
  But two great crystal tears were all that faltered and came.

  Only a tear for Venice?--she turned as in passion and loss,
  And stooped to his forehead and kissed it, as if she were kissing
          the cross.

  Faint with that strain of heart, she moved on then to another,
  Stern and strong in his death. "And dost thou suffer, my brother?"

  Holding his hands in hers:--"Out of the Piedmont lion
  Cometh the sweetness of freedom! sweetest to live or to die on."

  Holding his cold, rough hands,--"Well, O, well have ye done
  In noble, noble Piedmont, who would not be noble alone."

  Back he fell while she spoke. She rose to her feet with a spring,--
  "That was a Piedmontese! and this is the Court of the King."

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LANDING OF THE PILGRIM
FATHERS IN NEW ENGLAND.


  The breaking waves dashed high
    On a stern and rock-bound coast,
  And the woods against a stormy sky
    Their giant branches tossed;

  And the heavy night hung dark
    The hills and waters o'er,
  When a band of exiles moored their bark
    On the wild New England shore.

  Not as the conqueror comes,
    They, the true-hearted, came;
  Not with the roll of the stirring drums,
    And the trumpet that sings of fame:

  Not as the flying come,
    In silence and in fear;--
  They shook the depths of the desert gloom
    With their hymns of lofty cheer.

  Amidst the storm they sang,
    And the stars heard, and the sea;
  And the sounding aisles of the dim woods rang
    To the anthem of the free.

  The ocean eagle soared
    From his nest by the white wave's foam,
  And the rocking pines of the forest roared,--
    This was their welcome home.

  There were men with hoary hair
    Amidst that pilgrim-band:
  Why had they come to wither there,
    Away from their childhood's land?

  There was woman's fearless eye,
    Lit by her deep love's truth;
  There was manhood's brow serenely high,
    And the fiery heart of youth.

  What sought they thus afar?
    Bright jewels of the mine?
  The wealth of the seas, the spoils of war?--
    They sought a faith's pure shrine!

  Ay, call it holy ground,
    The soil where first they trod;
  They have left unstained what there they found,--
    Freedom to worship God.

FELICIA HEMANS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE AMERICAN FLAG.


  When Freedom, from her mountain height,
    Unfurled her standard to the air,
  She tore the azure robe of night,
    And set the stars of glory there!
  She mingled with its gorgeous dyes
  The milky baldric of the skies,
  And striped its pure, celestial white
  With streakings of the morning light;
  Then, from his mansion in the sun,
  She called her eagle-bearer down,
  And gave into his mighty hand
  The symbol of her chosen land!

  Majestic monarch of the cloud!
    Who rear'st aloft thy regal form,
  To hear the tempest trumping loud,
  And see the lightning lances driven,
    When strive the warriors of the storm,
  And rolls the thunder-drum of heaven,--
  Child of the Sun! to thee 'tis given
    To guard the banner of the free,
  To hover in the sulphur smoke,
  To ward away the battle-stroke,
  And bid its blendings shine afar,
  Like rainbows on the cloud of war,
    The harbingers of victory!

  Flag of the brave! thy folds shall fly,
  The sign of hope and triumph high!
  When speaks the signal-trumpet tone,
  And the long line comes gleaming on,
  Ere yet the life-blood, warm and wet,
  Has dimmed the glistening bayonet,
  Each soldier's eye shall brightly turn
  To where thy sky-born glories burn,
  And, as his springing steps advance,
  Catch war and vengeance from the glance.

  And when the cannon-mouthings loud
  Heave in wild wreaths the battle shroud,
  And gory sabres rise and fall
  Like shoots of flame on midnight's pall,
  Then shall thy meteor glances glow,
    And cowering foes shall shrink beneath
  Each gallant arm that strikes below
    That lovely messenger of death.

  Flag of the seas! on ocean wave
  Thy stars shall glitter o'er the brave;
  When death, careering on the gale,
  Sweeps darkly round the bellied sail,
  And frighted waves rush wildly back
  Before the broadside's reeling rack,
  Each dying wanderer of the sea
  Shall look at once to heaven and thee,
  And smile to see thy splendors fly
  In triumph o'er his closing eye.

  Flag of the free heart's hope and home,
    By angel hands to valor given!
  Thy stars have lit the welkin dome,
    And all thy hues were born in heaven.
  Forever float that standard sheet!
  Where breathes the foe but falls before us,
  With Freedom's soil beneath our feet,
    And Freedom's banner streaming o'er us!

JOSEPH RODMAN DRAKE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE STAR-BANGLED BANNER.[A]

[Footnote A: Begun during the attack on Fort McHenry, by a British
fleet, which on the night of Sept. 13, 1814, unsuccessfully bombarded
that fort from the river Chesapeake; the author, an envoy from the
city of Baltimore, having been detained as a prisoner on the fleet.]


  O, say, can you see by the dawn's early light
  What so proudly we hailed at the twilight's last gleaming?--
  Whose broad stripes and bright stars, through the clouds of the fight
  O'er the ramparts we watched, were so gallantly streaming!
  And the rocket's red glare, the bombs bursting in air,
  Gave proof through the night that our flag was still there;
  O! say, does that star-spangled banner yet wave
  O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave?

  On that shore, dimly seen through the mists of the deep,
  Where the foe's haughty host in dread silence reposes,
  What is that which the breeze, o'er the towering steep,
  As it fitfully blows, now conceals, now discloses?
  Now it catches the gleam of the morning's first beam,
  In full glory reflected now shines on the stream;
  'Tis the star-spangled banner! O, long may it wave
  O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave!

  And where is that band who so vauntingly swore
  That the havoc of war and the battle's confusion
  A home and a country should leave us no more?
  Their blood has washed out their foul footsteps' pollution.
  No refuge could save the hireling and slave
  From the terror of flight, or the gloom of the grave;
  And the star-spangled banner in triumph doth wave
  O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave!

  O! thus be it ever, when freemen shall stand
  Between their loved homes and the war's desolation!
  Blest with vict'ry and peace, may the Heaven-rescued land
  Praise the Power that hath made and preserved us a nation.
  Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,
  And this be our motto. "_In God is our trust_:"
  And the star-spangled banner in triumph shall wave
  O'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave.

FRANCIS SCOTT KEY.

       *       *       *       *       *




NEW ENGLAND'S DEAD.


  New England's dead! New England's dead!
    On every hill they lie;
  On every field of strife, made red
    By bloody victory.
  Each valley, where the battle poured
    Its red and awful tide,
  Beheld the brave New England sword
    With slaughter deeply dyed.
  Their bones are on the northern hill,
    And on the southern plain,
  By brook and river, lake and rill,
    And by the roaring main.

  The land is holy where they fought,
    And holy where they fell;
  For by their blood that land was bought,
    The land they loved so well,
  Then glory to that valiant band,
  The honored saviours of the land!

  O, few and weak their numbers were,--
    A handful of brave men;
  But to their God they gave their prayer,
    And rushed to battle then.
  The God of battles heard their cry,
  And sent to them the victory.

  They left the ploughshare in the mold,
  Their flocks and herds without a fold,
  The sickle in the unshorn grain,
  The corn, half-garnered, on the plain,
  And mustered, in their simple dress,
  For wrongs to seek a stern redress,
  To right those wrongs, come weal, come woe,
  To perish, or o'ercome their foe.

  And where are ye, O fearless men?
    And where are ye to-day?
  I call:--the hills reply again
    That ye have passed away;
  That on old Bunker's lonely height,
    In Trenton, and in Monmouth ground,
  The grass grows green, the harvest bright
    Above each soldier's mound.
  The bugle's wild and warlike blast
    Shall muster them no more;
  An army now might thunder past,
    And they heed not its roar.
  The starry flag, 'neath which they fought
    In many a bloody day,
  From their old graves shall rouse them not,
    For they have passed away.

ISAAC M'LELLAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE REFORMER.

  All grim and soiled and brown and tan,
    I saw a Strong One, in his wrath,
  Smiting the godless shrines of man
          Along his path.

  The Church beneath her trembling dome
    Essayed in vain her ghostly charm:
  Wealth shook within his gilded home
          With strange alarm.

  Fraud from his secret chambers fled
    Before the sunlight bursting in:
  Sloth drew her pillow o'er her head
          To drown the din.

  "Spare," Art implored, "yon holy pile;
    That grand old time-worn turret spare:"
  Meek Reverence, kneeling in the aisle
          Cried out, "Forbear!"

  Gray-bearded Use, who, deaf and blind,
    Groped for his old accustomed stone,
  Leaned on his staff, and wept to find
          His seat o'erthrown.

  Young Romance raised his dreamy eyes,
    O'erhung with paly locks of gold,--
  "Why smite," he asked in sad surprise,
          "The fair, the old?"

  Yet louder rang the Strong One's stroke,
    Yet nearer flashed his axe's gleam;
  Shuddering and sick of heart I woke,
          As from a dream.

  I looked: aside the dust-cloud rolled,--
    The Waster seemed the Builder too;
  Upspringing from the ruined Old
          I saw the New.

  'Twas but the ruin of the bad,--
    The wasting of the wrong and ill;
  Whate'er of good the old time had
          Was living still.

  Calm grew the brows of him I feared,
    The frown which awed me passed away,
  And left behind a smile which cheered
          Like breaking day.

  The grain grew green on battle-plains,
    O'er swarded war-mounds grazed the cow;
  The slave stood forging from his chains
          The spade and plough.

  Where frowned the fort, pavilions gay
    And cottage windows, flower-entwined,
  Looked out upon the peaceful bay
          And hills behind.

  Through vine-wreathed cups with wine once red.
    The lights on brimming crystal fell,
  Drawn, sparkling, from the rivulet head
          And mossy well.

  Through prison-walls, like Heaven-sent hope,
    Fresh breezes blew, and sunbeams strayed,
  And with the idle gallows-rope
          The young child played.

  Where the doomed victim in his cell
    Had counted o'er the weary hours,
  Glad school-girls, answering to the bell,
          Came crowned with flowers.

  Grown wiser for the lesson given,
    I fear no longer, for I know
  That where the share is deepest driven
          The best fruits grow.

  The outworn rite, the old abuse,
    The pious fraud transparent grown,
  The good held captive in the use
          Of wrong alone,--

  These wait their doom, from that great law
    Which makes the past time serve to-day;
  And fresher life the world shall draw
          From their decay.

  O backward-looking son of time!
    The new is old, the old is new,
  The cycle of a change sublime
          Still sweeping through.

  So wisely taught the Indian seer;
    Destroying Seva, forming Brahm,
  Who wake by turn Earth's love and fear,
          Are one, the same.

  Idly as thou, in that old day
    Thou mournest, did thy sire repine;
  So, in his time, thy child grown gray
          Shall sigh for thine.

  But life shall on and upward go;
    The eternal step of Progress beats
  To that great anthem, calm and slow,
          Which God repeats.

  Take heart!--the Waster builds again,--
    A charmed life old Goodness hath;
  The tares may perish,--but the grain
          Is not for death.

  God works in all things; all obey
    His first propulsion from the night:
  Wake thou and watch!--the world is gray
          With morning light!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




FREEDOM OF THE MIND.

WRITTEN WHILE IN PRISON FOR DENOUNCING THE DOMESTIC SLAVE-TRADE.


  High walls and huge the body may confine,
    And iron gates obstruct the prisoner's gaze,
  And massive bolts may baffle his design,
    And vigilant keepers watch his devious ways;
  But scorns the immortal mind such base control:
    No chains can bind it and no cell enclose.
  Swifter than light it flies from pole to pole,
    And in a flash from earth to heaven it goes.
  It leaps from mount to mount; from vale to vale
    It wanders, plucking honeyed fruits and flowers;
  It visits home to hear the fireside tale
    And in sweet converse pass the joyous hours;
  'Tis up before the sun, roaming afar,
  And in its watches wearies every star.

WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PRESENT CRISIS.


  When a deed is done for Freedom, through the broad earth's aching
          breast
  Runs a thrill of joy prophetic, trembling on from east to west,
  And the slave, where'er he cowers, feels the soul within him climb
  To the awful verge of manhood, as the energy sublime
  Of a century bursts full-blossomed on the thorny stem of Time.

  Through the walls of hut and palace shoots the instantaneous throe,
  When the travail of the Ages wrings earth's systems to and fro;
  At the birth of each new Era, with a recognizing start,
  Nation wildly looks at nation, standing with mute lips apart.
  And glad Truth's yet mightier man-child leaps beneath the Future's
          heart.

  So the Evil's triumph sendeth, with a terror and a chill,
  Under continent to continent, the sense of coming ill,
  And the slave, where'er he cowers, feels his sympathies with God
  In hot tear-drops ebbing earthward, to be drunk up by the sod,
  Till a corpse crawls round unburied, delving in the nobler clod.

  For mankind are one in spirit, and an instinct bears along,
  Round the earth's electric circle, the swift flush of right or
          wrong;
  Whether conscious or unconscious, yet Humanity's vast frame
  Through its ocean-sundered fibres feels the gush of joy or shame;--
  In the gain or loss of one race all the rest have equal claim.

  Once to every man and nation comes the moment to decide,
  In the strife of Truth with Falsehood, for the good or evil side;
  Some great cause, God's new Messiah, offering each the bloom or
          blight,
  Parts the goats upon the left hand, and the sheep upon the right,
  And the choice goes by forever 'twixt that darkness and that light.

  Hast thou chosen, O my people, on whose party thou shalt stand,
  Ere the Doom from its worn sandals shakes the dust against our land?
  Though the cause of Evil prosper, yet 'tis Truth alone is strong,
  And, albeit she wander outcast now, I see around her throng
  Troops of beautiful, tall angels, to enshield her from all wrong.

  Backward look across the ages and the beacon-moments see,
  That, like peaks of some sunk continent, jut through Oblivion's sea;
  Not an ear in court or market for the low foreboding cry
  Of those Crises, God's stern winnowers, from whose feet earth's
          chaff must fly;
  Never shows the choice momentous till the judgment hath passed by.

  Careless seems the great Avenger; history's pages but record
  One death-grapple in the darkness 'twixt old systems and the Word;
  Truth forever on the scaffold, Wrong forever on the throne,--
  Yet that scaffold sways the Future, and, behind the dim unknown,
  Standeth God within the shadow, keeping watch above his own.

  We see dimly in the Present what is small and what is great,
  Slow of faith, how weak an arm may turn the iron helm of fate,
  But the soul is still oracular; amid the market's din,
  List the ominous stern whisper from the Delphic cave within,--
  "They enslave their children's children who make compromise with
          sin."

  Slavery, the earthborn Cyclops, fellest of the giant brood,
  Sons of brutish Force and Darkness, who have drenched the earth
           with blood,
  Famished in his self-made desert, blinded by our purer day,
  Gropes in yet unblasted regions for his miserable prey;--
  Shall we guide his gory fingers where our helpless children play?

  Then to side with Truth is noble when we share her wretched crust,
  Ere her cause bring fame and profit, and 'tis prosperous to be just;
  Then it is the brave man chooses, while the coward stands aside,
  Doubting in his abject spirit, till his Lord is crucified,
  And the multitude make virtue of the faith they had denied.

  Count me o'er earth's chosen heroes,--they were souls that stood
          alone,
  While the men they agonized for hurled the contumelious stone,
  Stood serene, and down the future saw the golden beam incline
  To the side of perfect justice, mastered by their faith divine,
  By one man's plain truth to manhood and to God's supreme design.

  By the light of burning heretics Christ's bleeding feet I track,
  Toiling up new Calvaries ever with the cross that turns not back,
  And these mounts of anguish number how each generation learned
  One new word of that grand _Credo_ which in prophet-hearts hath
          burned
  Since the first man stood God-conquered with his face to heaven
          upturned.

  For Humanity sweeps onward: where to-day the martyr stands,
  On the morrow crouches Judas with the silver in his hands;
  Far in front the cross stands ready and the crackling fagots burn,
  While the hooting mob of yesterday in silent awe return
  To glean up the scattered ashes into History's golden urn.

  'Tis as easy to be heroes as to sit the idle slaves
  Of a legendary virtue carved upon our fathers' graves,
  Worshippers of light ancestral make the present light a crime;--
  Was the Mayflower launched by cowards, steered by men behind their
          time?
  Turn those tracks toward Past or Future, that make Plymouth rock
          sublime?

  They were men of present valor, stalwart old iconoclasts,
  Unconvinced by axe or gibbet that all virtue was the Past's;
  But we make their truth our falsehood, thinking that hath made us
          free,
  Hoarding it in mouldy parchments, while our tender spirits flee
  The rude grasp of that Impulse which drove them across the sea.

  They have rights who dare maintain them; we are traitors to our
          sires,
  Smothering in their holy ashes Freedom's new-lit altar-fires;
  Shall we make their creed our jailer? Shall we, in our haste to
          slay,
  From the tombs of the old prophets steal the funeral lamps away
  To light up the martyr-fagots round the prophets of to-day?

  New occasions teach new duties; Time makes ancient good uncouth;
  They must upward still, and onward, who would keep abreast of Truth;
  Lo, before us gleam her camp-fires! we ourselves must Pilgrims be,
  Launch our Mayflower, and steer boldly through the desperate winter
          sea,
  Nor attempt the Future's portal with the Past's blood-rusted key.

_December_, 1845.

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LITTLE CLOUD.[A]

[Footnote A: Arousing of Anti-Slavery agitation, when it was proposed
in Congress to abolish the "Missouri Compromise" and throw open the
Territories to slavery if their people should so vote.]

[1853.]

  As when, on Carmel's sterile steep,
    The ancient prophet bowed the knee,
  And seven times sent his servant forth
    To look toward the distant sea;

  There came at last a little cloud,
    Scarce larger than the human hand,
  Spreading and swelling till it broke
    In showers on all the herbless land;

  And hearts were glad, and shouts went up,
    And praise to Israel's mighty God,
  As the sear hills grew bright with flowers,
    And verdure clothed the valley sod,--

  Even so our eyes have waited long;
    But now a little cloud appears,
  Spreading and swelling as it glides
    Onward into the coming years.

  Bright cloud of Liberty! full soon,
    Far stretching from the ocean strand,
  Thy glorious folds shall spread abroad,
    Encircling our beloved land.

  Like the sweet rain on Judah's hills,
    The glorious boon of love shall fall,
  And our bond millions shall arise,
    As at an angel's trumpet-call.

  Then shall a shout of joy go up,--
    The wild, glad cry of freedom come
  From hearts long crushed by cruel hands,
    And songs from lips long sealed and dumb;

  And every bondman's chain be broke,
    And every soul that moves abroad
  In this wide realm shall know and feel
    The blessed Liberty of God.

JOHN HOWARD BRYANT.

       *       *       *       *       *




BROWN OF OSSAWATOMIE.


  John Brown of Ossawatomie spake on his dying day:
  "I will not have to shrive my soul a priest in Slavery's pay;
  But let some poor slave-mother whom I have striven to free,
  With her children, from the gallows-stair put up a prayer for me!"

  John Brown of Ossawatomie, they led him out to die;
  And lo! a poor slave-mother with her little child pressed nigh:
  Then the bold, blue eye grew tender, and the old harsh face grew
          mild,
  As he stooped between the jeering ranks and kissed the negro's
          child!

  The shadows of his stormy life that moment fell apart,
  And they who blamed the bloody hand forgave the loving heart;
  That kiss from all its guilty means redeemed the good intent,
  And round the grisly fighter's hair the martyr's aureole bent!

  Perish with him the folly that seeks through evil good!
  Long live the generous purpose unstained with human blood!
  Not the raid of midnight terror, but the thought which underlies;
  Not the borderer's pride of daring, but the Christian's sacrifice.

  Nevermore may yon Blue Ridges the Northern rifle hear,
  Nor see the light of blazing homes flash on the negro's spear;
  But let the free-winged angel Truth their guarded passes scale,
  To teach that right is more than might, and justice more than mail!

  So vainly shall Virginia set her battle in array;
  In vain her trampling squadrons knead the winter snow with clay!
  She may strike the pouncing eagle, but she dares not harm the dove;
  And every gate she bars to Hate shall open wide to Love!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




WORDS FOR THE "HALLELUJAH CHORUS."


  John Brown's body lies a-moldering in the grave,
  John Brown's body lies slumbering in his grave--
  But John Brown's soul is marching with the brave,
            His soul is marching on.

            Glory, glory, hallelujah!
            Glory, glory, hallelujah!
            Glory, glory, hallelujah!
              His soul is marching on.

  He has gone to be a soldier in the Army of the Lord;
  He is sworn as a private in the ranks of the Lord,--
  He shall stand at Armageddon with his brave old sword,
            When Heaven is marching on.

  He shall file in front where the lines of battle form,
  He shall face to front when the squares of battle form--
  Time with the column, and charge in the storm,
            Where men are marching on.

  Ah, foul Tyrants! do ye hear him where he comes?
  Ah, black traitor! do ye know him as he comes,
  In thunder of the cannon and roll of the drums,
            As we go marching on?

  Men may die, and molder in the dust--
  Men may die, and arise again from dust,
  Shoulder to shoulder, in the ranks of the Just,
            When Heaven is marching on.

            Glory, glory, hallelujah!
            Glory, glory, hallelujah!
            Glory, glory, hallelujah!
              His soul is marching on.

HENRY HOWARD BROWNELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




BATTLE-HYMN OF THE REPUBLIC.


  Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord:
  He is trampling out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are
          stored;
  He hath loosed the fateful lightning of his terrible swift sword:
       His truth is marching on.

  I have seen him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps;
  They have builded him an altar in the evening dews and damps;
  I can read his righteous sentence by the dim and flaring lamps:
       His day is marching on.

  I have read a fiery gospel, writ in burnished rows of steel:
  "As ye deal with my contemners, so with you my grace shall deal;
  Let the Hero, born of woman, crush the serpent with his heel,
       Since God is marching on."

  He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat;
  He is sifting out the hearts of men before his judgment-seat:
  O, be swift, my soul, to answer him! be jubilant, my feet!
       Our God is marching on.

  In the beauty of the lilies Christ was born across the sea,
  With a glory in his bosom that transfigures you and me;
  As he died to make men holy, let us die to make men free,
       While God is marching on.

JULIA WARD HOWE.

       *       *       *       *       *





JOHN CHARLES FREMONT.[A]

[Footnote A: Fremont's proclamation of martial law in Missouri, in
August, 1861, declaring free all slaves of Rebels, was received with
ardor by the North, but annulled by President Lincoln as premature.]


  Thy error, Fremont, simply was to act
  A brave man's part, without the statesman's tact,
  And, taking counsel but of common sense,
  To strike at cause as well as consequence.
  O, never yet since Roland wound his horn
  At Roncesvalles has a blast been blown
  Far-heard, wide-echoed, startling as thine own,
  Heard from the van of freedom's hope forlorn!
  It had been safer, doubtless, for the time,
  To flatter treason, and avoid offence
  To that Dark Power whose underlying crime
  Heaves upward its perpetual turbulence.
  But, if thine be the fate of all who break
  The ground for truth's seed, or forerun their years
  Till lost in distance, or with stout hearts make
  A lane for freedom through the level spears,
  Still take thou courage! God has spoken through thee,
  Irrevocable, the mighty words, Be free!
  The land shakes with them, and the slave's dull ear
  Turns from the rice-swamp stealthily to hear.
  Who would recall them now must first arrest
  The winds that blow down from the free North-west,
  Ruffling the Gulf; or like a scroll roll back
  The Mississippi to its upper springs.
  Such words fulfil their prophecy, and lack
  But the full time to harden into things.

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




HEROES.


  The winds that once the Argo bore
    Have died by Neptune's ruined shrines,
  And her hull is the drift of the deep-sea floor,
    Though shaped of Pelion's tallest pines.
  You may seek her crew on every isle
    Fair in the foam of AEgean seas,
  But out of their rest no charm can wile
    Jason and Orpheus and Hercules.

  And Priam's wail is heard no more
    By windy Ilion's sea-built walls;
  Nor great Achilles, stained with gore,
    Shouts "O ye gods, 'tis Hector falls!"
  On Ida's mount is the shining snow,
    But Jove has gone from its brow away;
  And red on the plain the poppies grow
    Where the Greek and the Trojan fought that day.

  Mother Earth, are the heroes dead?
    Do they thrill the soul of the years no more?
  Are the gleaming snows and the poppies red
    All that is left of the brave of yore?
  Are there none to fight as Theseus fought,
    Far in the young world's misty dawn?
  Or teach as gray-haired Nestor taught?
    Mother Earth, are the heroes gone?

  Gone? In a grander form they rise.
    Dead? We may clasp their hands in ours,
  And catch the light of their clearer eyes,
    And wreathe their brows with immortal flowers.
  Wherever a noble deed is done,
    'Tis the pulse of a hero's heart is stirred;
  Wherever Right has a triumph won,
    There are the heroes' voices heard.
  Their armor rings on a fairer field
    Than the Greek and the Trojan fiercely trod;
  For Freedom's sword is the blade they wield,
    And the gleam above is the smile of God.
  So, in his isle of calm delight,
    Jason may sleep the years away;
  For the heroes live, and the sky is bright,
    And the world is a braver world to-day.

EDNA DEAN PROCTOR.

       *       *       *       *       *




LAUS DEO!

[On hearing the bells ring on the passage of the Constitutional
Amendment abolishing slavery.]


        It is done!
    Clang of bell and roar of gun
  Send the tidings up and down.
    How the belfries rock and reel!
    How the great guns, peal on peal,
  Fling the joy from town to town!

        Ring, O bells!
    Every stroke exulting tells
  Of the burial hour of crime.
    Loud and long, that all may hear,
    Ring for every listening ear
  Of Eternity and Time!

        Let us kneel:
    God's own voice is in that peal,
  And this spot is holy ground.
    Lord, forgive us! What are we,
    That our eyes this glory see,
  That our ears have heard the sound!

        For the Lord
    On the whirlwind is abroad;
  In the earthquake he has spoken;
    He has smitten with his thunder
    The iron walls asunder,
  And the gates of brass are broken!

        Loud and long
    Lift the old exulting song;
  Sing with Miriam by the sea:
    He has cast the mighty down;
    Horse and rider sink and drown;
  He has triumphed gloriously!

        Did we dare,
    In our agony of prayer,
  Ask for more than He has done?
    When was ever his right hand
    Over any time or land
  Stretched as now beneath the sun?

        How they pale,
    Ancient myth and song and tale,
  In this wonder of our days,
    When the cruel rod of war
    Blossoms white with righteous law,
  And the wrath of man is praise!

        Blotted out!
    All within and all about
  Shall a fresher life begin;
    Freer breathe the universe
    As it rolls its heavy curse
  On the dead and buried sin.

        It is done!
    In the circuit of the sun
  Shall the sound thereof go forth.
    It shall bid the sad rejoice,
    It shall give the dumb a voice,
  It shall belt with joy the earth!

        Ring and swing,
    Bells of joy! On morning's wing
  Send the song of praise abroad!
    With a sound of broken chains,
    Tell the nations that He reigns,
  Who alone is Lord and God!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




A HOLY NATION.


  Let Liberty run onward with the years,
  And circle with the seasons; let her break
  The tyrant's harshness, the oppressor's spears;
  Bring ripened recompenses that shall make
  Supreme amends for sorrow's long arrears;
  Drop holy benison on hearts that ache;
  Put clearer radiance into human eyes,
  And set the glad earth singing to the skies.

  Clean natures coin pure statutes. Let us cleanse
  The hearts that beat within us; let us mow
  Clear to the roots our falseness and pretence,
  Tread down our rank ambitions, overthrow
  Our braggart moods of puffed self-consequence,
  Plough up our hideous thistles which do grow
  Faster than maize in May time, and strike dead
  The base infections our low greeds have bred.

RICHARD REALF.

       *       *       *       *       *

III.

WAR.

       *       *       *       *       *




BATTLE OF THE ANGELS.

FROM "PARADISE LOST," BOOK VI.

THE ARRAY.


                      Now went forth the morn,
  Such as in highest heaven, arrayed in gold
  Empyreal; from before her vanished night,
  Shot through with orient beams; when all the plain
  Covered with thick embattled squadrons bright,
  Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery steeds,
  Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view.

       *       *       *       *       *

  The apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat,
  Idol of majesty divine, enclosed
  With flaming cherubim, and golden shields;
  Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now
  'Twixt host and host but narrow space was left,
  A dreadful interval, and front to front
  Presented stood in terrible array
  Of hideous length: before the cloudy van,
  On the rough edge of battle ere it joined,
  Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced,
  Came towering, armed in adamant and gold.


THE CONFLICT.

                    Michael bid sound
  The archangel trumpet; through the vast of heaven
  It sounded, and the faithful armies rung
  Hosanna to the Highest: nor stood at gaze
  The adverse legions, nor less hideous joined
  The horrid shock. Now storming fury rose,
  And clamor, such as heard in heaven till now
  Was never; arms on armor clashing brayed
  Horrible discord, and the madding wheels
  Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise
  Of conflict; overhead the dismal hiss
  Of fiery darts in flaming volleys flew,
  And flying vaulted either host with fire.
  So under fiery cope together rushed
  Both battles main, with ruinous assault
  And inextinguishable rage. All heaven
  Resounded; and had earth been then, all earth
  Had to her centre shook.

       *       *       *       *       *

                      Deeds of eternal fame
  Were done, but infinite: for wide was spread
  That war, and various: sometimes on firm ground
  A standing fight, then, soaring on main wing,
  Tormented all the air; all air seemed then
  Conflicting fire.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power
  Which God hath in his mighty angels placed!)
  Their arms away threw, and to the hills
  (For earth hath this variety from heaven,
  Of pleasures situate in hill and dale),
  Light as the lightning glimpse they ran, they flew,
  From their foundations loosening to and fro,
  They plucked the seated hills, with all their load,
  Rocks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops
  Uplifting bore them in their hands: amaze,
  Be sure, and terror, seized the rebel host,
  When coming towards them so dread they saw
  The bottom of the mountains upward turned,
   .      .      .      .  and on their heads
  Main promontories flung, which in the air
  Came shadowing, and oppressed whole legions armed;
  Their armor helped their harm, crushed in and bruised
  Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain
  Implacable, and many a dolorous groan;
  Long struggling underneath, ere they could wind
  Out of such prison, though spirits of purest light,
  Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown.
  The rest, in imitation, to like arms
  Betook them, and the neighboring hills uptore:
  So hills amid the air encountered hills,
  Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire,
  That underground they fought in dismal shade;
  Infernal noise! war seemed a civil game
  To this uproar; horrid confusion heaped
  Upon confusion rose.


THE VICTOR.

  So spake the Son, and into terror changed
  His countenance too severe to be beheld,
  And full of wrath bent on his enemies.
  At once the four spread out their starry wings
  With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs
  Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound
  Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host.
  He on his impious foes right onward drove,
  Gloomy as night: under his burning wheels
  The steadfast empyrean shook throughout.
  All but the throne itself of God. Full soon
  Among them he arrived; in his right hand
  Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent
  Before him, such as in their souls infixed
  Plagues: they, astonished, all resistance lost,
  All courage; down their idle weapons dropt;
  O'er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode
  Of thrones and mighty seraphim prostrate,
  That wished the mountains now might be again
  Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire.
  Nor less on either side tempestuous fell
  His arrows, from the fourfold-visaged Four
  Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels
  Distinct alike with multitude of eyes;
  One spirit in them ruled; and every eye
  Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire
  Among the accursed, that withered all their strength,
  And of their wonted vigor left them drained,
  Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen.
  Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked
  His thunder in mid volley; for he meant
  Not to destroy, but root them out of heaven:
  The overthrown he raised, and as a herd
  Of goats or timorous flock together thronged,
  Drove them before him thunderstruck, pursued
  With terrors and with furies, to the bounds
  And crystal wall of heaven; which, opening wide,
  Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed
  Into the wasteful deep: the monstrous sight
  Struck them with horror backward, but far worse
  Urged them behind: headlong themselves they threw
  Down from the verge of heaven; eternal wrath
  Burnt after them to the bottomless pit.

MILTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DESTRUCTION OF SENNACHERIB.

FROM "HEBREW MELODIES."


  The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,
  And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold;
  And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea,
  When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.

  Like the leaves of the forest when summer is green,
  That host with their banners at sunset were seen:
  Like the leaves of the forest when autumn hath blown,
  That host on the morrow lay withered and strown.

  For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,
  And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed;
  And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,
  And their hearts but once heaved, and forever grew still!

  And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide,
  But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride:
  And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,
  And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

  And there lay the rider distorted and pale.
  With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail;
  And the tents were all silent, the banners alone,
  The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown.

  And the widows of Ashur are loud in their wail,
  And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal;
  And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword,
  Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord!

LORD BYRON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE SCHOOL OF WAR.

FROM "TAMBURLAINE."


  TAMBURLAINE.--But now, my boys, leave off and list to me,
  That mean to teach you rudiments of war:
  I'll have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
  March in your armor through watery fens,
  Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
  Hunger and thirst, right adjuncts of the war,
  And after this to scale a castle wall,
  Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
  And make whole cities caper in the air.
  Then next the way to fortify your men:
  In champion grounds, what figure serves you best,
  For which the quinque-angle form is meet,
  Because the corners there may fall more flat
  Whereas the fort may fittest be assailed,
  And sharpest where the assault is desperate.
  The ditches must be deep; the counterscarps
  Narrow and steep; the walls made high and broad;
  The bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
  With cavalieros and thick counterforts,
  And room within to lodge six thousand men.
  It must have privy ditches, countermines,
  And secret issuings to defend the ditch;
  It must have high argins and covered ways,
  To keep the bulwark fronts from battery,
  And parapets to hide the musketers;
  Casemates to place the great artillery;
  And store of ordnance, that from every flank
  May scour the outward curtains of the fort,
  Dismount the cannon of the adverse part,
  Murder the foe, and save the walls from breach.
  When this is learned for service on the land,
  By plain and easy demonstration
  I'll teach you how to make the water mount,
  That you may dry-foot march through lakes and pools,
  Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
  And make a fortress in the raging waves,
  Fenced with the concave of monstrous rock,
  Invincible by nature of the place.
  When this is done then are ye soldiers,
  And worthy sons of Tamburlaine the Great.

  CALYPHAS.--My lord, but this is dangerous to be done:
  We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.

  TAMBURLAINE.--Villain! Art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
  And fear'st to die, or with a curtle-axe
  To hew thy flesh, and make a gaping wound?
  Hast thou beheld a peal of ordnance strike
  A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse,
  Whose shattered limbs, being tossed as high as Heaven,
  Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
  And canst thou, coward, stand in fear of death?
  Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
  Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
  Dyeing their lances with their streaming blood,
  And yet at night carouse within my tent,
  Filling their empty veins with airy wine,
  That, being concocted, turns to crimson blood.--
  And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds?
  View me, thy father, that hath conquered kings,
  And with his horse marched round about the earth
  Quite void of scars and clear from any wound,
  That by the wars lost not a drop of blood,--
  And see him lance his flesh to teach you all.
            (_He cuts his arm._)
  A wound is nothing, be it ne'er so deep;
  Blood is the god of war's rich livery,
  Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
  As great a grace and majesty to me,
  As if a chain of gold, enamelled,
  Enchased with diamonds, sapphires, rubies,
  And fairest pearl of wealthy India,
  Were mounted here under a canopy,
  And I sate down clothed with a massy robe,
  That late adorned the Afric potentate,
  Whom I brought bound unto Damascus' walls.
  Come, boys, and with your fingers search my wound,
  And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
  While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
  Now, my boys, what think ye of a wound?

  CALYPHAS.--I know not what I should think of it; methinks it is a
          pitiful sight.

  CELEBINUS.--'Tis nothing: give me a wound, father.

  AMYRAS.--And me another, my lord.

  TAMBURLAINE.--Come, sirrah, give me your arm.

  CELEBINUS.--Here, father, cut it bravely, as you did your own.

  TAMBURLAINE.--It shall suffice thou darest abide a wound:
  My boy, thou shalt not lose a drop of blood
  Before we meet the army of the Turk;
  But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
  Dreadless of blows, of bloody wounds, and death;
  And let the burning of Larissa-walls,
  My speech of war, and this my wound you see,
  Teach you, my boys, to bear courageous minds,
  Fit for the followers of great Tamburlaine!

CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE.

       *       *       *       *       *




CATILINE TO THE ROMAN ARMY.

FROM "CATILINE," ACT V. SC. 2.


  Sound all to arms!     (_A flourish of trumpets._)
  Call in the captains,--     (_To an officer_)
                         I would speak with them!

            (_The officer goes._)

  Now, Hope! away,--and welcome gallant Death!
  Welcome the clanging shield, the trumpet's yell,--
  Welcome the fever of the mounting blood,
  That makes wounds light, and battle's crimson toil
  Seem but a sport,--and welcome the cold bed,
  Where soldiers with their upturned faces lie,--
  And welcome wolf's and vulture's hungry throats,
  That make their sepulchres! We fight to-night.

          (_The soldiery enter._)

  Centurions! all is ruined! I disdain
  To hide the truth from you. The die is thrown!
  And now, let each that wishes for long life
  Put up his sword, and kneel for peace to Rome.
  Ye all are free to go. What! no man stirs!
  Not one! a soldier's spirit in you all?
  Give me your hands! (This moisture in my eyes
  Is womanish,--'twill pass.) My noble hearts!
  Well have you chosen to die! For, in my mind,
  The grave is better than o'erburdened life;
  Better the quick release of glorious wounds,
  Than the eternal taunts of galling tongues;
  Better the spear-head quivering in the heart,
  Than daily struggle against fortune's curse;
  Better, in manhood's muscle and high blood,
  To leap the gulf, than totter to its edge
  In poverty, dull pain, and base decay.
  Once more, I say,--are ye resolved?

        (_The soldiers shout_, "All! All!")

  Then, each man to his tent, and take the arms
  That he would love to die in,--for, _this hour_,
  We storm the Consul's camp. A last farewell!

           (_He takes their hands._)

  When next we meet,--we'll have no time to look,
  How parting clouds a soldier's countenance.
  Few as we are, we'll rouse them with a peal
  That shall shake Rome!
  Now to your cohorts' heads;--the word's--Revenge!

GEORGE CROLY.

       *       *       *       *       *




CARACTACUS.


  Before proud Rome's imperial throne
    In mind's unconquered mood,
  As if the triumph were his own,
    The dauntless captive stood.
  None, to have seen his free-born air,
  Had fancied him a captive there.

  Though, through the crowded streets of Rome,
    With slow and stately tread,
  Far from his own loved island home,
    That day in triumph led,--
  Unbound his head, unbent his knee,
  Undimmed his eye, his aspect free.

  A free and fearless glance he cast
    On temple, arch, and tower,
  By which the long procession passed
    Of Rome's victorious power;
  And somewhat of a scornful smile
    Upcurled his haughty lip the while.

  And now he stood, with brow serene,
    Where slaves might prostrate fall,
  Bearing a Briton's manly mien
    In Caesar's palace hall;
  Claiming, with kindled brow and cheek,
  The liberty e'en there to speak.

  Nor could Rome's haughty lord withstand
    The claim that look preferred,
  But motioned with uplifted hand
    The suppliant should be heard,--
  If he indeed a suppliant were
  Whose glance demanded audience there.

  Deep stillness fell on all the crowd,
    From Claudius on his throne
  Down to the meanest slave that bowed
    At his imperial throne;
  Silent his fellow-captive's grief
  As fearless spoke the Island Chief:

  "Think not, thou eagle Lord of Rome,
    And master of the world,
  Though victory's banner o'er thy dome
    In triumph now is furled,
  I would address thee as thy slave,
  But as the bold should greet the brave!

  "I might, perchance, could I have deigned
    To hold a vassal's throne,
  E'en now in Britain's isle have reigned
    A king in name alone,
  Yet holding, as thy meek ally,
  A monarch's mimic pageantry.

  "Then through Rome's crowded streets to-day
    I might have rode with thee,
  Not in a captive's base array,
    But fetterless and free,--
  If freedom he could hope to find,
  Whose bondage is of heart and mind.

  "But canst thou marvel that, freeborn,
    With heart and soul unquelled,
  Throne, crown, and sceptre I should scorn,
    By thy permission held?
  Or that I should retain my right
  Till wrested by a conqueror's might?

  "Rome, with her palaces and towers,
    By us unwished, unreft,
  Her homely huts and woodland bowers
    To Britain might have left;
  Worthless to you their wealth must be,
  But dear to us, for they were free!

  "I might have bowed before, but where
    Had been thy triumph now?
  To my resolve no yoke to bear
    Thou ow'st thy laurelled brow;
  Inglorious victory had been thine,
  And more inglorious bondage mine.

  "Now I have spoken, do thy will;
    Be life or death my lot,
  Since Britain's throne no more I fill,
    To me it matters not.
  My fame is clear; but on my fate
  Thy glory or thy shame must wait."

  He ceased; from all around upsprung
    A murmur of applause,
  For well had truth and freedom's tongue
    Maintained their holy cause.
  The conqueror was the captive then;
  He bade the slave be free again.

BERNARD BARTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




SEMPRONIUS' SPEECH FOR WAR.

FROM "CATO," ACT II. SC. 1.


    My voice is still for war.
  Gods! can a Roman senate long debate
  Which of the two to choose, slavery or death?
  No; let us rise at once, gird on our swords,
  And at the head of our remaining troops
  Attack the foe, break through the thick array
  Of his thronged legions, and charge home upon him.
  Perhaps some arm, more lucky than the rest,
  May reach his heart, and free the world from bondage.
  Rise! Fathers, rise! 'tis Rome demands your help:
  Rise, and revenge her slaughtered citizens,
  Or share their fate! The corpse of half her senate
  Manures the fields of Thessaly, while we
  Sit here deliberating, in cold debate,
  If we should sacrifice our lives to honor,
  Or wear them out in servitude and chains.
  Rouse up, for shame! our brothers of Pharsalia
  Point at their wounds, and cry aloud,--"To battle!"
  Great Pompey's shade complains that we are slow,
  And Scipio's ghost walks unrevenged amongst us.

JOSEPH ADDISON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DEATH OF LEONIDAS.


  It was the wild midnight,--
    A storm was on the sky;
  The lightning gave its light,
    And the thunder echoed by.

  The torrent swept the glen,
    The ocean lashed the shore;
  Then rose the Spartan men,
    To make their bed in gore!

  Swift from the deluge ground
    Three hundred took the shield;
  Then, silent, gathered round
    The leader of the field!

  He spake no warrior word,
    He bade no trumpet blow,
  But the signal thunder roared,
    And they rushed upon the foe.

  The fiery element
    Showed, with one mighty gleam,
  Rampart, and flag, and tent,
    Like the spectres of a dream.

  All up the mountain's side,
    All down the woody vale,
  All by the rolling tide
    Waved the Persian banners pale.

  And foremost from the pass,
    Among the slumbering band,
  Sprang King Leonidas,
    Like the lightning's living brand.

  Then double darkness fell,
    And the forest ceased its moan;
  But there came a clash of steel,
    And a distant dying groan.

  Anon, a trumpet blew,
    And a fiery sheet burst high,
  That o'er the midnight threw
    A blood-red canopy.

  A host glared on the hill;
    A host glared by the bay;
  But the Greeks rushed onward still,
    Like leopards in their play.

  The air was all a yell,
    And the earth was all a flame,
  Where the Spartan's bloody steel
    On the silken turbans came;

  And still the Greek rushed on
    Where the fiery torrent rolled,
  Till like a rising sun
    Shone Xerxes' tent of gold.

  They found a royal feast,
    His midnight banquet, there;
  And the treasures of the East
    Lay beneath the Doric spear.

  Then sat to the repast
    The bravest of the brave!
  That feast must be their last,
    That spot must be their grave.

  They pledged old Sparta's name
    In cups of Syrian wine,
  And the warrior's deathless fame
    Was sung in strains divine.

  They took the rose-wreathed lyres
    From eunuch and from slave,
  And taught the languid wires,
    The sounds that Freedom gave.

  But now the morning star
    Crowned Oeta's twilight brow;
  And the Persian horn of war
    From the hills began to blow.

  Up rose the glorious rank,
    To Greece one cup poured high,
  Then hand in hand they drank,
    "To immortality!"

  Fear on King Xerxes fell,
    When, like spirits from the tomb,
  With shout and trumpet knell,
    He saw the warriors come.

  But down swept all his power,
    With chariot and with charge;
  Down poured the arrows' shower.
    Till sank the Dorian's targe.

  They gathered round the tent,
    With all their strength unstrung;
  To Greece one look they sent,
    Then on high their torches flung.

  The king sat on the throne,
    His captains by his side,
  While the flame rushed roaring on,
    And their Paean loud replied.

  Thus fought the Greek of old!
    Thus will he fight again!
  Shall not the self-same mould
    Bring forth the self-same men?

GEORGE CROLY.

       *       *       *       *       *




SONG OF THE GREEKS.

[1821.]


    Again to the battle, Achaians!
    Our hearts bid the tyrants defiance;
  Our land,--the first garden of Liberty's-tree,--
  Has been, and shall yet be, the land of the free;
    For the cross of our faith is replanted,
    The pale dying crescent is daunted,
  And we march that the footprints of Mahomet's slaves
  May be washed out in blood from our forefathers' graves.
    Their spirits are hovering o'er us,
    And the sword shall to glory restore us.

    Ah! what though no succor advances,
    Nor Christendom's chivalrous lances
  Are stretched in our aid?--Be the combat our own!
  And we'll perish or conquer more proudly alone;
    For we've sworn by our country's assaulters,
    By the virgins they've dragged from our altars,
  By our massacred patriots, our children in chains,
  By our heroes of old, and their blood in our veins,
    That, living, we will be victorious,
    Or that, dying, our deaths shall be glorious.

    A breath of submission we breathe not:
    The sword that we've drawn we will sheathe not:
  Its scabbard is left where our martyrs are laid,
  And the vengeance of ages has whetted its blade.
    Earth may hide, waves engulf, fire consume us;
    But they shall not to slavery doom us:
  If they rule, it shall be o'er our ashes and graves:--
  But we've smote them already with fire on the waves.
    And new triumphs on land are before us;--
    To the charge!--Heaven's banner is o'er us.

    This day--shall ye blush for its story;
    Or brighten your lives with its glory?--
  Our women--oh, say, shall they shriek in despair,
  Or embrace us from conquest, with wreaths in their hair?
    Accursed may his memory blacken,
    If a coward there be that would slacken
  Till we've trampled the turban, and shown ourselves worth
  Being sprung from and named for, the godlike of earth.
    Strike home!--and the world shall revere us
    As heroes descended from heroes.

    Old Greece lightens up with emotion!
    Her inlands, her isles of the ocean,
  Fanes rebuilt, and fair towns, shall with jubilee ring,
  And the Nine shall new hallow their Helicon's spring.
    Our hearts shall be kindled in gladness,
    That were cold, and extinguished in sadness;
  Whilst our maidens shall dance with their white waving arms,
  Singing joy to the brave that delivered their charms,--
    When the blood of yon Mussulman cravens
    Shall have crimsoned the beaks of our ravens!

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




MARCO BOZZARIS.

[AT LASPI--ANCIENT PLATAEA--AUGUST 20, 1823.]


  At midnight, in his guarded tent,
    The Turk was dreaming of the hour
  When Greece, her knee in suppliance bent,
    Should tremble at his power.
  In dreams, through camp and court, he bore
  The trophies of a conqueror;
    In dreams his song of triumph heard;
  Then wore his monarch's signet-ring,
  Then pressed that monarch's throne--a king;
  As wild his thoughts, and gay of wing,
    As Eden's garden bird.

  At midnight, in the forest shades,
    Bozzaris ranged his Suliote band,--
  True as the steel of their tried blades,
    Heroes in heart and hand.
  There had the Persian's thousands stood,
  There had the glad earth drunk their blood,
    On old Plataea's day;
  And now there breathed that haunted air
  The sons of sires who conquered there,
  With arm to strike, and soul to dare,
    As quick, as far, as they.

  An hour passed on, the Turk awoke:
    That bright dream was his last;
  He woke--to hear his sentries shriek,
    "To arms! they come! the Greek! the Greek!"
  He woke--to die midst flame, and smoke,
  And shout, and groan, and sabre-stroke,
    And death-shots falling thick and fast
  As lightnings from the mountain-cloud;
  And heard, with voice as trumpet loud,
    Bozzaris cheer his band:
  "Strike--till the last armed foe expires;
  Strike--for your altars and your fires;
  Strike--for the green graves of your sires,
    God, and your native land!"

  They fought--like brave men, long and well;
    They piled that ground with Moslem slain:
  They conquered--but Bozzaris fell,
    Bleeding at every vein.
  His few surviving comrades saw
  His smile when rang their proud hurrah,
    And the red field was won;
  Then saw in death his eyelids close
  Calmly, as to a night's repose,
    Like flowers at set of sun.

  Come to the bridal chamber, Death,
    Come to the mother, when she feels,
  For the first time, her first-born's breath;
    Come when the blessed seals
  That close the pestilence are broke,
  And crowded cities wail its stroke;
  Come in consumption's ghastly form,
  The earthquake shock, the ocean storm;
  Come when the heart beats high and warm,
    With banquet song and dance and wine,--
  And thou art terrible; the tear,
  The groan, the knell, the pall, the bier,
  And all we know, or dream, or fear
    Of agony, are thine.

  But to the hero, when his sword
    Has won the battle for the free,
  Thy voice sounds like a prophet's word,
  And in its hollow tones are heard
    The thanks of millions yet to be.
  Come when his task of fame is wrought;
  Come with her laurel-leaf, blood-bought;
    Come in her crowning hour,--and then
  Thy sunken eye's unearthly light
  To him is welcome as the sight
    Of sky and stars to prisoned men;
  Thy grasp is welcome as the hand
  Of brother in a foreign land;
  Thy summons welcome as the cry
  That told the Indian isles were nigh
    To the world-seeking Genoese,
  When the land-wind, from woods of palm,
  And orange-groves, and fields of balm,
    Blew o'er the Haytian seas.

  Bozzaris! with the storied brave
    Greece nurtured in her glory's time,
  Rest thee; there is no prouder grave,
    Even in her own proud clime.
  She wore no funeral weeds for thee,
    Nor bade the dark hearse wave its plume,
  Like torn branch from death's leafless tree,
  In sorrow's pomp and pageantry,
    The heartless luxury of the tomb.
  But she remembers thee as one
  Long loved, and for a season gone.
  For thee her poet's lyre is wreathed,
  Her marble wrought, her music breathed;
  For thee she rings the birthday bells;
  Of thee her babes' first lisping tells;
  For thine her evening prayer is said
  At palace couch and cottage bed.
  Her soldier, closing with the foe,
  Gives for thy sake a deadlier blow;
  His plighted maiden, when she fears
  For him, the joy of her young years,
  Thinks of thy fate, and checks her tears.
    And she, the mother of thy boys,
  Though in her eye and faded cheek
  Is read the grief she will not speak,
    The memory of her buried joys,--
  And even she who gave thee birth,--
  Will, by her pilgrim-circled hearth,
    Talk of thy doom without a sigh;
  For thou art freedom's now, and fame's,--
  One of the few, the immortal names
    That were not born to die.

FITZ-GREENE HALLECK.

       *       *       *       *       *




HARMOSAN.


  Now the third and fatal conflict for the Persian throne was done,
  And the Moslem's fiery valor had the crowning victory won.

  Harmosan, the last and boldest the invader to defy,
  Captive, overborn by numbers, they were bringing forth to die.

  Then exclaimed that noble captive: "Lo, I perish in my thirst;
  Give me but one drink of water, and let then arrive the worst!"

  In his hand he took the goblet: but awhile the draught forbore,
  Seeming doubtfully the purpose of the foeman to explore.

  Well might then have paused the bravest--for, around him, angry foes
  With a hedge of naked weapons did the lonely man enclose.

  "But what fear'st thou?" cried the caliph; "is it, friend, a secret blow?
  Fear it not! our gallant Moslems no such treacherous dealing know.

  "Thou may'st quench thy thirst securely, for thou shalt not die before
  Thou hast drunk that cup of water--this reprieve is thine--no more!"

  Quick the satrap dashed the goblet down to earth with ready hand,
  And the liquid sank forever, lost amid the burning sand.

  "Thou hast said that mine my life is, till the water of that cup
  I have drained; then bid thy servants that spilled water gather up!"

  For a moment stood the caliph as by doubtful passions stirred--
  Then exclaimed: "For ever sacred must remain a monarch's word.
  Bring another cup, and straightway to the noble Persian give:
  Drink, I said before, and perish--now I bid thee drink and live!"

RICHARD CHENEVIX TRENCH.

       *       *       *       *       *




BATTLE SCENE.

FROM "THE CID."


  Then cried my Cid--"In charity, as to the rescue--ho!"
  With bucklers braced before their breasts, with lances pointing low,
  With stooping crests and heads bent down above the saddle-bow,
  All firm of hand and high of heart they roll upon the foe.
  And he that in a good hour was born, his clarion voice rings out,
  And clear above the clang of arms is heard his battle shout:
  "Among them, gentlemen! Strike home for the love of charity!
  The champion of Bivar is here--Ruy Diaz--I am he!"
  Then bearing where Bermuez still maintains unequal fight,
  Three hundred lances down they come, their pennons flickering white;
  Down go three hundred Moors to earth, a man to every blow;
  And when they wheel, three hundred more, as charging back they go.
  It was a sight to see the lances rise and fall that day;
  The shivered shields and riven mail, to see how thick they lay;
  The pennons that went in snow-white came out a gory red;
  The horses running riderless, the riders lying dead;
  While Moors call on Mohammed, and "St. James!" the Christians cry,
  And sixty score of Moors and more in narrow compass lie.

From the Spanish.
Translation of JOHN ORMSBY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LORD OF BUTRAGO.


  "Your horse is faint, my King, my Lord! your gallant horse is sick,--
  His limbs are torn, his breast is gored, on his eye the film is thick;
  Mount, mount on mine, O mount apace, I pray thee, mount and fly!
  Or in my arms I'll lift your Grace,--their trampling hoofs are nigh!

  "My King, my King,! you're wounded sore,--the blood runs from your feet;
  But only lay a hand before, and I'll lift you to your seat;
  Mount, Juan, for they gather fast!--I hear their coming cry,--
  Mount, mount, and ride for jeopardy,--I'll save you though I die!

  "Stand, noble steed! this hour of need,--be gentle as a lamb;
  I'll kiss the foam from off thy mouth,--thy master dear I am,--
  Mount, Juan, mount; whate'er betide, away the bridle fling,
  And plunge the rowels in his side.--My horse shall save my King!

  "Nay, never speak; my sires, Lord King, received their land from yours,
  And joyfully their blood shall spring, so be it thine secures;
  If I should fly, and thou, my King, be found among the dead,
  How could I stand 'mong gentlemen, such scorn on my gray head?

  "Castile's proud dames shall never point the finger of disdain,
  And say there's one that ran away when our good lords were slain!
  I leave Diego in your care,--you'll fill his father's place;
  Strike, strike the spur, and never spare--God's blessing on your Grace!"

  So spake the brave Montanez, Butrago's lord was he;
  And turned him to the coming host in steadfastness and glee;
  He flung himself among them, as they came down the hill,--
  He died, God wot! but not before his sword had drunk its fill.

From the Spanish.
Translation of JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART.

       *       *       *       *       *




HAKON'S DEFIANCE.

FROM "HAKON JARL."

[Olaf Trygvesoen from Ireland is trying to introduce Christianity, and
reclaim his father's kingdom, in Norway, and has invaded the realm of
Earl Hakon, a formidable heathen usurper, who, after defeat in battle,
unsuccessfully attempts to have King Olaf assassinated by Thorer
Klake, one of his adherents. But Olaf slays Klake, and now visits
Hakon, lying hid in a peasant's hut.]

  _Enter_ OLAF TRYGVESOeN, _muffled up in a gray cloak,
  with a broad hat on his head._

  HAKON [_without looking up_].--
  My valiant Thorer Klake, hast come at last?
  Hast been successful? Dost thou bring to me
  What thou didst promise? Answer, Thorer Klake.

  OLAF.--All things have happened as they should, my lord;
  But pardon Thorer that he does not come
  And bring himself King Olaf's head to thee--
  'Twas difficult for him. Thor knows he had
  A sort of loathing that himself should bring it,
  And so he sent me.

  HAKON.--Well, 'tis good; away,
  And deeply bury it in the dark earth.
  I will not look on it myself: my eye
  Bears not such sights,--they reappear in dreams.
  Bury the body with it. Tell thy lord
  That he shall come at once.

  OLAF.--He is asleep.

  HAKON.--Asleep?

  OLAF.--A midday slumber; he lies stretched
  Stiffly beneath a shadowy elder-tree.

  HAKON.--Then wake him up. [_Aside._] Asleep, Asleep, and after such
  A deed--Ha! Thorer, I admire thee;
  Thou hast rare courage.     [_Aloud._]   Thrall, go wake him up.

  OLAF.--But wilt thou first not look at Olaf's head?

  HAKON.--No; I have said no.

  OLAF.--Thou dost think, my lord,
  That perhaps it is a horrid frightful sight:
  It is not so, my lord; for Olaf's head
  Looks fresh and sound as any in the land.

  HAKON.--Away, I tell thee!

  OLAF.--I ne'er saw the like:
  I always heard that Hakon was a hero,
  Few like him in the North,--and does he fear
  To see a lifeless and a corpseless head?
  How wouldst thou tremble then, my lord, if thou
  Shouldst see it on his body?

  HAKON [_turning round angrily_].--
  Thrall, thou darest!
  Where hast thou got it?

  OLAF [_takes his hat off, and throws off his cloak_].--
  On my shoulders, Earl.
  Forgive me that I bring it thee myself
  In such a way: 'twas easiest for me.

  HAKON.--What, Olaf! Ha! what treachery is here?

  OLAF.--Old gray-beard, spare thy rash, heroic wrath.
  Attempt not to fight Olaf, but remember
  That he has still his head upon his body,
  And that thy impotent, gray-bearded strength
  Was only fitting for the headless Olaf.

  HAKON [_rushes at him_].--
  Ha, Hilfheim!

  OLAF [_strikes his sword, and says in a loud voice_].--
  So, be quiet now, I say,
  And sheathe thy sword again. My followers
  Surround the house; my vessels are a match
  For all of thine, and I myself have come
  To win the country in an honest fight.
  Thyself hast urged me with thy plots to do it.
  Thou standest like a despicable thrall
  In his own pitfall caught at last; but I
  Will make no use of these advantages
  Which fate has granted me. I am convinced
  That I may boldly meet thee face to face.
  Thy purpose, as thou seest, has wholly failed,
  And in his own blood does thy Thorer swim.
  Thou seest 'twere easy for me to have seized thee;
  To strike thee down were even easier still:
  But I the Christian doctrine do confess,
  And do such poor advantages despise.
  So choose between two courses. Still be Earl
  Of Hlade as thou wast, and do me homage,
  Or else take flight; for when we meet again
  'Twill be the time for red and bleeding brows.

  HAKON [_proudly and quietly_].--
  My choice is made. I choose the latter, Olaf.
  Thou callest me a villain and a thrall;
  That forces up a smile upon my lips.
  Olaf, one hears indeed that thou art young;
  It is by mockery and arrogance
  That one can judge thy age. Now, look at me
  Full in the eyes; consider well my brow:
  Hast thou among the thralls e'er met such looks?
  Dost think that cunning or that cowardice
  Could e'er have carved these wrinkles on my brow?
  I did entice thee hither. Ha! 'tis true
  I knew that thou didst wait but for a sign
  To flutter after the enticing bait;
  That in thy soul thou didst more highly prize
  Thy kinship with an extinct race of kings
  Than great Earl Hakon's world-renowned deeds;
  That thou didst watch the opportunity
  To fall upon the old man in his rest.
  Does it astonish thee that I should wish
  Quickly to rid myself of such a foe?
  That I deceived a dreamer who despised
  The mighty gods,--does that astonish thee?
  Does it astonish thee that I approved
  My warrior's purpose, since a hostile fate
  Attempted to dethrone, not only me,
  But all Valhalla's gods?

  OLAF.--Remember, Hakon,--
  Remember, Hakon, that e'en thou thyself
  Hast been a Christian; that thou wast baptized
  By Bishop Popo, and that thou since then
  Didst break thy oath. How many hast thou broken?

  HAKON.--Accursed forever may that moment be
  When by the cunning monk I was deceived,
  And let myself be fooled by paltry tricks.
  He held a red-hot iron in his hand,
  After by magic he had covered it
  With witches' ointment.

  OLAF.--O thou blind old man!
  Thy silver hair does make me pity thee.

  HAKON.--Ha! spare thy pity; as thou seest me here,
  Thou seest the last flash and the latest spark
  Of ancient Northern force and hero's life;
  And that, with all thy fever-stricken dreams,
  Proud youth, thou shalt be powerless to quench.
  I well do know it is the Christian custom
  To pity, to convert, and to amend.
  Our custom is to heartily despise you,
  To ruminate upon your fall and death,
  As foes to gods and to a hero's life.
  That Hakon does, and therein does consist
  His villainy. By Odin, and by Thor,
  Thou shalt not quench old Norway's warlike flame
  With all thy misty dreams of piety.

  OLAF.--'Tis well: fate shall decide. We separate,
  And woe to thee when next we meet again.

  HAKON.--Aye, woe to me if then I crush thee not.

  OLAF.--Heaven shall strike thee with its fiery might!

  HAKON.--No, with his hammer Thor the cross will smite!

From the Danish of ADAM GOTTLOB OEHLENSCHLAeGER.
Translation of SIR FRANK C. LASCELLES.

       *       *       *       *       *




A DANISH BARROW

ON THE EAST DEVON COAST.


  Lie still, old Dane, below thy heap!
    A sturdy-back and sturdy-limb,
    Whoe'er he was, I warrant him
  Upon whose mound the single sheep
    Browses and tinkles in the sun,
    Within the narrow vale alone.

  Lie still, old Dane! This restful scene
    Suits well thy centuries of sleep:
    The soft brown roots above thee creep,
  The lotus flaunts his ruddy sheen,
    And,--vain memento of the spot,--The
    turquoise-eyed forget-me-not.

  Lie still! Thy mother-land herself
    Would know thee not again: no more
    The Raven from the northern shore
  Hails the bold crew to push for pelf,
    Through fire and blood and slaughtered kings
    'Neath the black terror of his wings.

  And thou,--thy very name is lost!
    The peasant only knows that here
    Bold Alfred scooped thy flinty bier,
  And prayed a foeman's prayer, and tost
    His auburn head, and said, "One more
    Of England's foes guards England's shore,"

  And turned and passed to other feats,
    And left thee in thine iron robe,
    To circle with the circling globe,
  While Time's corrosive dewdrop eats
    The giant warrior to a crust
    Of earth in earth, and rust in rust.

  So lie: and let the children play
    And sit like flowers upon thy grave
    And crown with flowers,--that hardly have
  A briefer blooming-tide than they;--
    By hurrying years urged on to rest,
    As thou within the Mother's breast.

FRANCIS TURNER PALGRAVE.

       *       *       *       *       *




HERMANN AND THUSNELDA.

  Ha! there comes he, with sweat, with blood of Romans,
  And dust of the fight all stained! Oh, never
            Saw I Hermann so lovely!
            Never such fire in his eyes!

  Come! I tremble for joy; hand me the Eagle
  And the red dripping sword! come, breathe, and rest thee;
            Rest thee here in my bosom;
            Rest from the terrible fight!

  Rest thee, while from thy brow I wipe the big drops,
  And the blood from thy cheek!--that cheek, how glowing!
            Hermann! Hermann! Thusnelda
            Never so loved thee before!

  No, not then, when thou first in old oak shadows,
  With that manly brown arm didst wildly grasp me!
            Spell-bound I read in thy look
            That immortality then

  Which thou now hast won. Tell to the forests,
  Great Augustus, with trembling, amidst his gods now,
            Drinks his nectar; for Hermann,
            Hermann immortal is found!

  "Wherefore curl'st thou my hair? Lies not our father
  Cold and silent in death? Oh, had Augustus
            Only headed his army,--
            _He_ should lie bloodier there!"

  Let me lift up thy hair; 'tis sinking, Hermann:
  Proudly thy locks should curl above the crown now!
            Sigmar is with the immortals!
            Follow, and mourn him no more!

From the German of FREIDRICH GOTTLIEB KLOPSTOCK.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BATTLE-SONG OF GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS.


  Fear not, O little flock! the foe
  Who madly seeks your overthrow,
      Dread not his rage and power;
  What though your courage sometimes faints?
  His seeming triumph o'er God's saints
      Lasts but a little hour.

  Be of good cheer; your cause belongs
  To him who can avenge your wrongs,
      Leave it to him, our Lord.
  Though hidden now from all our eyes,
  He sees the Gideon who shall rise
      To save us, and his word.

  As true as God's own word is true,
  Not earth or hell with all their crew
      Against us shall prevail.
  A jest and by-word are they grown;
  God is with us, we are his own,
      Our victory cannot fail.

  Amen, Lord Jesus; grant our prayer!
  Great Captain, now thine arm make bare;
      Fight for us once again!
  So shall the saints and martyrs raise
  A mighty chorus to thy praise,
      World without end! Amen.

From the German of MICHAEL ALTENBURG.

       *       *       *       *       *




SWORD SONG.


  Sword, on my left side gleaming,
  What means thy bright eye's beaming?
  It makes my spirit dance
  To see thy friendly glance.
          Hurrah!

  "A valiant rider bears me;
  A free-born German wears me:
  That makes my eye so bright;
  That is the sword's delight."
          Hurrah!

  Yes, good sword, I _am_ free,
  And love thee heartily,
  And clasp thee to my side,
  E'en as the plighted bride.
          Hurrah!

  "And I to thee, by Heaven,
  My light steel life have given;
  When shall the knot be tied?
  When wilt thou take thy bride?"
          Hurrah!

  The trumpet's solemn warning
  Shall hail the bridal morning,
  When cannon-thunders wake,
  Then my true-love I take.
          Hurrah!

  "O blessed, blessed meeting!
  My heart is wildly beating:
  Come, bridegroom, come for me;
  My garland waiteth thee."
          Hurrah!

  Why in the scabbard rattle,
  So wild, so fierce for battle?
  What means this restless glow?
  My sword, why clatter so?
          Hurrah!

  "Well may thy prisoner rattle;
  My spirit yearns for battle.
  Rider, 'tis war's wild glow
  That makes me tremble so."
          Hurrah!

  Stay in thy chamber near,
  My love; what wilt thou here?
  Still in thy chamber bide;
  Soon, soon I take my bride.
          Hurrah!

  "Let me not longer wait:
  Love's garden blooms in state,
  With roses bloody-red,
  And many a bright death-bed."
          Hurrah!

  Now, then, come forth, my bride!
  Come forth, thou rider's pride!
  Come out, my good sword, come!
  Forth to thy father's home!
          Hurrah!

  "O, in the field to prance
  The glorious wedding dance!
  How, in the sun's bright beams,
  Bride-like the clear steel gleams!"
          Hurrah!

  Then forward, valiant fighters!
  And forward, German riders!
  And when the heart grows cold,
  Let each his love infold.
          Hurrah!

  Once on the left it hung,
  And stolen glances flung;
  Now clearly on your right
  Doth God each fond bride plight.
          Hurrah!

  Then let your hot lips feel
  That virgin cheek of steel;
  One kiss,--and woe betide
  Him who forsakes the bride.
          Hurrah!

  Now let the loved one sing;
  Now let the clear blade ring,
  Till the bright sparks shall fly,
  Heralds of victory!
          Hurrah!

  For, hark! the trumpet's warning
  Proclaims the marriage morning;
  It dawns in festal pride;
  Hurrah, thou Iron Bride!
          Hurrah!

From the German of KARL THEODOR KOeRNER.
Translation of CHARLES TIMOTHY BROOKS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TROOPER'S DEATH.


  The weary night is o'er at last!
  We ride so still, we ride so fast!
    We ride where Death is lying.
  The morning wind doth coldly pass,
  Landlord! we'll take another glass,
        Ere dying.

  Thou, springing grass, that art so green,
  Shall soon be rosy red, I ween,
    My blood the hue supplying!
  I drink the first glass, sword in hand,
  To him who for the Fatherland
        Lies dying!

  Now quickly comes the second draught,
  And that shall be to freedom quaffed
    While freedom's foes are flying!
  The rest, O land, our hope and faith!
  We'd drink to thee with latest breath,
        Though dying!

  My darling!--ah, the glass is out!
  The bullets ring, the riders shout--
    No time for wine or sighing!
  There! bring my love the shattered glass--
  Charge! On the foe! no joys surpass
        Such dying!

From the German of GEORG HERWEGH.
Translation of ROSSITER W. RAYMOND.

       *       *       *       *       *




BINGEN ON THE RHINE.


  A soldier of the Legion lay dying in Algiers,
  There was lack of woman's nursing, there was dearth of woman's
          tears;
  But a comrade stood beside him, while his life-blood ebbed away,
  And bent, with pitying glances, to hear what he might say.
  The dying soldier faltered, and he took that comrade's hand,
  And he said, "I nevermore shall see my own, my native land;
  Take a message, and a token, to some distant friends of mine,
  For I was born at Bingen,--at Bingen on the Rhine.

  "Tell my brothers and companions, when they meet and crowd around,
  To hear my mournful story, in that pleasant vineyard ground,
  That we fought the battle bravely, and when the day was done,
  Full many a corse lay ghastly pale beneath the setting sun;
  And, mid the dead and dying, were some grown old in wars,--
  The death-wound on their gallant breasts, the last of many scars;
  And some were young, and suddenly beheld life's morn decline,--
  And one had come from Bingen,--fair Bingen on the Rhine.

  "Tell my mother that her other son shall comfort her old age;
  For I was still a truant bird, that thought his home a cage.
  For my father was a soldier, and even as a child
  My heart leaped forth to hear him tell of struggles fierce and wild;
  And when he died, and left us to divide his scanty hoard,
  I let them take whate'er they would,--but kept my father's sword;
  And with boyish love I hung it where the bright light used to shine,
  On the cottage wall at Bingen,--calm Bingen on the Rhine.

  "Tell my sister not to weep for me, and sob with drooping head,
  When the troops come marching home again with glad and gallant
          tread,
  But to look upon them proudly, with a calm and steadfast eye,
  For her brother was a soldier too, and not afraid to die;
  And if a comrade seek her love, I ask her in my name
  To listen to him kindly, without regret or shame,
  And to hang the old sword in its place (my father's sword and mine)
  For the honor of old Bingen,--dear Bingen on the Rhine.

  "There's another,--not a sister; in the happy days gone by
  You'd have known her by the merriment that sparkled in her eye;
  Too innocent for coquetry,--too fond for idle scorning,--
  O friend! I fear the lightest heart makes sometimes heaviest
          mourning!
  Tell her the last night of my life (for, ere the moon be risen,
  My body will be out of pain, my soul be out of prison),--
  I dreamed I stood with _her_, and saw the yellow sunlight shine
  On the vine-clad hills of Bingen,--fair Bingen on the Rhine.

  "I saw the blue Rhine sweep along,--I heard, or seemed to hear,
  The German songs we used to sing, in chorus sweet and clear;
  And down the pleasant river, and up the slanting hill,
  The echoing chorus sounding, through the evening calm and still;
  And her glad blue eyes were on me, as we passed, with friendly talk,
  Down many a path beloved of yore, and well-remembered walk!
  And her little hand lay lightly, confidingly in mine,--
  But we'll meet no more at Bingen,--loved Bingen on the Rhine."

  His trembling voice grew faint and hoarse,--his grasp was childish
          weak,--
  His eyes put on a dying look,--he sighed and ceased to speak;
  His comrade bent to lift him, but the spark of life had fled,--
  The soldier of the Legion in a foreign land is dead!
  And the soft moon rose up slowly, and calmly she looked down
  On the red sand of the battle-field, with bloody corses strewn;
  Yes, calmly on that dreadful scene her pale light seemed to shine,
  As it shone on distant Bingen,--fair Bingen on the Rhine.

CAROLINE ELIZABETH SARAH NORTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




HOHENLINDEN.

[1800.]


  On Linden, when the sun was low,
  All bloodless lay the untrodden snow,
  And dark as winter was the flow
  Of Iser, rolling rapidly.

  But Linden saw another sight
  When the drum beat, at dead of night,
  Commanding fires of death to light
  The darkness of her scenery.

  By torch and trumpet fast arrayed,
  Each horseman drew his battle-blade,
  And furious every charger neighed,
  To join the dreadful revelry.

  Then shook the hills with thunder riven,
  Then rushed the steeds to battle driven,
  And louder than the bolts of heaven
  Far flashed the red artillery.

  But redder yet that light shall glow
  On Linden's hills of stained snow,
  And bloodier yet the torrent flow
  Of Iser, rolling rapidly.

  'Tis morn, but scarce yon level sun
  Can pierce the war-clouds, rolling dun,
  Where furious Frank and fiery Hun
  Shout in their sulphurous canopy.

  The combat deepens. On, ye brave,
  Who rush to glory, or the grave!
  Wave, Munich! all thy banners wave,
  And charge with all thy chivalry!

  Few, few shall part where many meet!
  The snow shall be their winding-sheet,
  And every turf beneath their feet
  Shall be a soldier's sepulchre.

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




IVRY.

[1590.]


  Now glory to the Lord of hosts, from whom all glories are!
  And glory to our sovereign liege, King Henry of Navarre!
  Now let there be the merry sound of music and the dance,
  Through thy corn-fields green, and sunny vines, O pleasant land of
          France!
  And thou, Rochelle, our own Rochelle, proud city of the waters,
  Again let raptures light the eyes of all thy mourning daughters;
  As thou wert constant in our ills, be joyous in our joys;
  For cold and stiff and still are they who wrought thy walls annoy.
  Hurrah! hurrah! a single field hath turned the chance of war!
  Hurrah! hurrah! for Ivry, and Henry of Navarre.

  Oh! how our hearts were beating, when, at the dawn of day,
  We saw the army of the League drawn out in long array;
  With all its priest-led citizens, and all its rebel peers,
  And Appenzel's stout infantry, and Egmont's Flemish spears.
  There rode the brood of false Lorraine, the curses of our land;
  And dark Mayenne was in the midst, a truncheon in his hand;
  An as we looked on them, we thought of Seine's empurpled flood,
  And good Coligni's hoary hair all dabbled with his blood;
  And we cried unto the living God, who rules the fate of war,
  To fight for His own holy name, and Henry of Navarre.

  The king has come to marshal us, in all his armor drest;
  And he has bound a snow-white plume upon his gallant crest.
  He looked upon his people, and a tear was in his eye;
  He looked upon the traitors, and his glance was stern and high.
  Right graciously he smiled on us, as rolled from wing to wing,
  Down all our line, a deafening shout: God save our lord the king!
  "And if my standard-bearer fall, as fall full well he may--
  For never saw I promise yet of such a bloody fray--
  Press where you see my white plume shine amidst the ranks of war,
  And be your oriflamme to-day the helmet of Navarre."

  Hurrah! the foes are moving. Hark to the mingled din,
  Of fife, and steed, and trump, and drum, and roaring culverin.
  The fiery duke is pricking fast across Saint Andre's plain,
  With all the hireling chivalry of Guelders and Almayne.
  Now by the lips of those ye love, fair gentlemen of France,
  Charge for the golden lilies--upon them with the lance!
  A thousand spurs are striking deep, a thousand spears in rest.
  A thousand knights are pressing close behind the snow-white crest;
  And in they burst, and on they rushed, while, like a guiding star,
  Amidst the thickest carnage blazed the helmet of Navarre.

  Now, God be praised, the day is ours: Mayenne hath turned his rein;
  D'Aumale hath cried for quarter; the Flemish count is slain;
  Their ranks are breaking like thin clouds before a Biscay gale;
  The field is heaped with bleeding steeds, and flags, and cloven mail.
  And then we thought on vengeance, and, all along our van,
  Remember Saint Bartholomew! was passed from man to man.
  But out spake gentle Henry--"No Frenchmen is my foe:
  Down, down, with every foreigner, but let your brethren go."
  Oh! was there ever such a knight, in friendship or in war,
  As our sovereign lord, King Henry, the soldier of Navarre?

  Right well fought all the Frenchmen who fought for France to-day;
  And many a lordly banner God gave them for a prey.
  But we of the religion have borne us best in fight;
  And the good lord of Rosny hath ta'en the cornet white--
  Our own true Maximilian the cornet white hath ta'en,
  The cornet white with crosses black, the flag of false Lorraine.
  Up with it high; unfurl it wide--that all the host may know
  How God hath humbled the proud house which wrought His Church such
          woe.
  Then on the ground, while trumpets sound their loudest point of war,
  Fling the red shreds, a footcloth meet for Henry of Navarre.

  Ho! maidens of Vienna; ho! matrons of Lucerne--
  Weep, weep, and rend your hair for those who never shall return.
  Ho! Philip, send, for charity, thy Mexican pistoles,
  That Antwerp monks may sing a mass for thy poor spearmen's souls.
  Ho! gallant nobles of the League, look that your arms be bright;
  Ho! burghers of St. Genevieve, keep watch and ward to-night;
  For our God hath crushed the tyrant, our God hath raised the slave,
  And mocked the counsel of the wise, and the valor of the brave.
  Then glory to His holy name, from whom all glories are;
  And glory to our sovereign lord, King Henry of Navarre!

LORD MACAULAY.

       *       *       *       *       *




INCIDENT OF THE FRENCH CAMP.


  You know we French stormed Ratisbon:
    A mile or so away,
  On a little mound, Napoleon
    Stood on our storming-day;
  With neck out-thrust, you fancy how,
    Legs wide, arms locked behind,
  As if to balance the prone brow,
    Oppressive with its mind.

  Just as perhaps he mused, "My plans
    That soar, to earth may fall,
  Let once my army-leader Lannes
    Waver at yonder wall,"
  Out 'twixt the battery-smokes there flew
    A rider, bound on bound
  Full-galloping; nor bridle drew
    Until he reached the mound.

  Then off there flung in smiling joy,
    And held himself erect
  By just his horse's mane, a boy:
    You hardly could suspect
  (So tight he kept his lips compressed,
    Scarce any blood came through),
  You looked twice ere you saw his breast
    Was all but shot in two.

  "Well," cried he, "Emperor, by God's grace
    We've got you Ratisbon!
  The marshal's in the market-place,
    And you'll be there anon
  To see your flag-bird flap his vans
    Where I, to heart's desire,
  Perched him!" The chief's eye flashed; his plans
    Soared up again like fire.

  The chief's eye flashed; but presently
    Softened itself, as sheathes
  A film the mother-eagle's eye
    When her bruised eaglet breathes:
  "You're wounded!" "Nay," his soldier's pride
    Touched to the quick, he said:
  "I'm killed, sire!" And, his chief beside,
    Smiling, the boy fell dead.

ROBERT BROWNING.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BRONZE STATUE OF NAPOLEON.


  The work is done! the spent flame burns no more,
    The furnace fires smoke and die,
  The iron flood boils over. Ope the door,
    And let the haughty one pass by!
  Roar, mighty river, rush upon your course,
    A bound,--and, from your dwelling past,
  Dash forward, like a torrent from its source,
    A flame from the volcano cast!
  To gulp your lava-waves earth's jaws extend,
    Your fury in one mass fling forth,--
  In your steel mould, O Bronze, a slave descend,
    An emperor return to earth!
  Again NAPOLEON,--'tis his form appears!
    Hard soldier in unending quarrel,
  Who cost so much of insult, blood, and tears,
    For only a few boughs of laurel!

  For mourning France it was a day of grief,
    When, down from its high station flung,
  His mighty statue, like some shameful thief,
    In coils of a vile rope was hung;
  When we beheld at the grand column's base,
    And o'er a shrieking cable bowed,
  The stranger's strength that mighty bronze displace
    To hurrahs of a foreign crowd;
  When, forced by thousand arms, head-foremost thrown,
    The proud mass cast in monarch mould
  Made sudden fall, and on the hard, cold stone
    Its iron carcass sternly rolled.
  The Hun, the stupid Hun, with soiled, rank skin,
    Ignoble fury in his glance,
  The emperor's form the kennel's filth within
    Drew after him, in face of France!
  On those within whose bosoms hearts hold reign,
    That hour like remorse must weigh
  On each French brow,--'tis the eternal stain,
    Which only death can wash away!
  I saw, where palace-walls gave shade and ease,
    The wagons of the foreign force;
  I saw them strip the bark which clothed our trees,
    To cast it to their hungry horse.
  I saw the Northman, with his savage lip,
    Bruising our flesh till black with gore,
  Our bread devour,--on our nostrils sip
    The air which was our own before!

  In the abasement and the pain,--the weight
    Of outrages no words make known,--
  I charged one only being with my hate:
    _Be thou accursed, Napoleon!_
  O lank-haired Corsican, your France was fair,
    In the full sun of Messidor!
  She was a tameless and a rebel mare,
    Nor steel bit nor gold rein she bore;
  Wild steed with rustic flank;--yet, while she trod,--
    Reeking with blood of royalty,
  But proud with strong foot striking the old sod,
    At last, and for the first time, free,--
  Never a hand, her virgin form passed o'er,
    Left blemish nor affront essayed;
  And never her broad sides the saddle bore,
    Nor harness by the stranger made.
  A noble vagrant,--with coat smooth and bright,
    And nostril red, and action proud,--
  As high she reared, she did the world affright
    With neighings which rang long and loud.
  You came; her mighty loins, her paces scanned,
    Pliant and eager for the track;
  Hot Centaur, twisting in her mane your hand,
    You sprang all booted to her back.
  Then, as she loved the war's exciting sound,
    The smell of powder and the drum,
  You gave her Earth for exercising ground,
    Bade Battles as her pastimes come!
  Then, no repose for her,--no nights, no sleep!
    The air and toil for evermore!
  And human forms like unto sand crushed deep,
    And blood which rose her chest before!
  Through fifteen years her hard hoofs' rapid course
    So ground the generations,
  And she passed smoking in her speed and force
    Over the breast of nations;
  Till,--tired in ne'er earned goal to place vain trust,
    To tread a path ne'er left behind,
  To knead the universe and like a dust
    To uplift scattered human kind,--
  Feebly and worn, and gasping as she trode,
    Stumbling each step of her career,
  She craved for rest the Corsican who rode.
    But, torturer! you would not hear;
  You pressed her harder with your nervous thigh,
    You tightened more the goading bit,
  Choked in her foaming mouth her frantic cry,
    And brake her teeth in fury-fit.
  She rose,--but the strife came. From farther fall
    Saved not the curb she could not know,--
  She went down, pillowed on the cannon-ball,
    And thou wert broken by the blow!

  Now born again, from depths where thou wert hurled,
    A radiant eagle dost thou rise;
  Winging thy flight again to rule the world,
    Thine image reascends the skies.
  No longer now the robber of a crown,--
    The insolent usurper,--he,
  With cushions of a throne, unpitying, down
    Who pressed the throat of Liberty,--
  Old slave of the Alliance, sad and lone,
    Who died upon a sombre rock,
  And France's image until death dragged on
    For chain, beneath the stranger's stroke,--
  NAPOLEON stands, unsullied by a stain:
    Thanks to the flatterer's tuneful race
  The lying poets who ring praises vain,
    Has Caesar 'mong the gods found place!
  His image to the city-walls gives light;
    His name has made the city's hum,--
  Still sounded ceaselessly, as through the fight
    It echoed farther than the drum.
  From the high suburbs, where the people crowd,
    Doth Paris, an old pilgrim now,
  Each day descend to greet the pillar proud,
    And humble there his monarch brow;--
  The arms encumbered with a mortal wreath,
    With flowers for that bronze's pall,
  (No mothers look on, as they pass beneath,--
    It grew beneath their tears so tall!)--
  In working-vest, in drunkenness of soul,
    Unto the fife's and trumpet's tone,
  Doth joyous Paris dance the Carmagnole
    Around the great Napoleon.

  Thus, Gentle Monarchs, pass unnoted on!
    Mild Pastors of Mankind, away!
  Sages, depart, as common brows have gone,
    Devoid of the immortal ray!
  For vainly you make light the people's chain;
    And vainly, like a calm flock, come
  On your own footsteps, without sweat or pain,
    The people,--treading towards their tomb.
  Soon as your star doth to its setting glide,
    And its last lustre shall be given
  By your quenched name,--upon the popular tide
    Scarce a faint furrow shall be riven.
  Pass, pass ye on! For you no statue high!
    Your names shall vanish from the horde:
  Their memory is for those who lead to die
    Beneath the cannon and the sword;
  Their love, for him who on the humid field
    By thousands lays to rot their bones;
  For him, who bids them pyramids to build,--
    And bear upon their backs the stones!

From the French of AUGUSTE BARBIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




ON THE WARRES IN IRELAND.

FROM "EPIGRAMS," BOOK IV. EPIGRAM 6.


  I praised the speech, but cannot now abide it,
  That warre is sweet to those that have not try'd it;
  For I have proved it now and plainly see't,
  It is so sweet, it maketh all things sweet.
  At home Canaric wines and Greek grow lothsome;
  Here milk is nectar, water tasteth toothsome.
  There without baked, rost, boyl'd, it is no cheere;
  Bisket we like, and Bonny Clabo here.
  There we complain of one wan roasted chick;
  Here meat worse cookt ne're makes us sick.
  At home in silken sparrers, beds of Down,
  We scant can rest, but still tosse up and down;
  Here we can sleep, a saddle to our pillow,
  A hedge the Curtaine, Canopy a Willow.
  There if a child but cry, O what a spite!
  Here we can brook three larums in one night.
  There homely rooms must be perfumed with Roses;
  Here match and powder ne're offend our noses.
  There from a storm of rain we run like Pullets;
  Here we stand fast against a shower of bullets.
  Lo, then how greatly their opinions erre,
  That think there is no great delight in warre;
    But yet for this, sweet warre, He be thy debtor,
    I shall forever love my home the better.

SIR JOHN HARRINGTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALFRED THE HARPER.

  Dark fell the night, the watch was set,
  The host was idly spread,
  The Danes around their watchfires met,
  Caroused, and fiercely fed.

  The chiefs beneath a tent of leaves
  And Guthrum, king of all,
  Devoured the flesh of England's beeves,
  And laughed at England's fall.
  Each warrior proud, each Danish earl,
  In mail of wolf-skin clad,
  Their bracelets white with plundered pearl,
  Their eyes with triumph mad.

  From Humber-land to Severn-land,
  And on to Tamar stream,
  Where Thames makes green the towery strand,
  Where Medway's waters gleam,--
  With hands of steel and mouths of flame
  They raged the kingdom through;
  And where the Norseman sickle came,
  No crop but hunger grew.

  They loaded many an English horse
  With wealth of cities fair;
  They dragged from many a father's corse
  The daughter by her hair.
  And English slaves, and gems and gold,
  Were gathered round the feast;
  Till midnight in their woodland hold,
  O, never that riot ceased.

  In stalked a warrior tall and rude
  Before the strong sea-kings;
  "Ye Lords and Earls of Odin's brood,
  Without a harper sings.
  He seems a simple man and poor,
  But well he sounds the lay;
  And well, ye Norseman chiefs, be sure,
  Will ye the song repay."

  In trod the bard with keen cold look,
  And glanced along the board,
  That with the shout and war-cry shook
  Of many a Danish lord.
  But thirty brows, inflamed and stern,
  Soon bent on him their gaze,
  While calm he gazed, as if to learn
  Who chief deserved his praise.

  Loud Guthrum spake,--"Nay, gaze not thus,
  Thou Harper weak and poor!
  By Thor! who bandy looks with us
  Must worse than looks endure.
  Sing high the praise of Denmark's host,
  High praise each dauntless Earl;
  The brave who stun this English coast
  With war's unceasing whirl."

  The Harper slowly bent his head,
  And touched aloud the string;
  Then raised his face, and boldly said,
  "Hear thou my lay, O King!
  High praise from every mouth of man
  To all who boldly strive,
  Who fall where first the fight began,
  And ne'er go back alive.

  "Fill high your cups, and swell the shout,
  At famous Regnar's name!
  Who sank his host in bloody rout,
  When he to Humber came.
  His men were chased, his sons were slain,
  And he was left alone.
  They bound him in an iron chain
  Upon a dungeon stone.

  "With iron links they bound him fast;
  With snakes they filled the hole,
  That made his flesh their long repast,
  And bit into his soul.

  "Great chiefs, why sink in gloom your eyes?
  Why champ your teeth in pain?
  Still lives the song though Regnar dies!
  Fill high your cups again!
  Ye too, perchance, O Norseman lords!
  Who fought and swayed so long,
  Shall soon but live in minstrel words,
  And owe your names to song.

  "This land has graves by thousands more
  Than that where Regnar lies.
  When conquests fade, and rule is o'er,
  The sod must close your eyes.
  How soon, who knows? Not chief, nor bard;
  And yet to me 'tis given,
  To see your foreheads deeply scarred,
  And guess the doom of Heaven.

  "I may not read or when or how,
  But, Earls and Kings, be sure
  I see a blade o'er every brow,
  Where pride now sits secure.
  Fill high the cups, raise loud the strain!
  When chief and monarch fall,
  Their names in song shall breathe again,
  And thrill the feastful hall."

  Grim sat the chiefs; one heaved a groan,
  And one grew pale with dread,
  His iron mace was grasped by one,
  By one his wine was shed.
  And Guthrum cried, "Nay, bard, no more
  We hear thy boding lay;
  Make drunk the song with spoil and gore!
  Light up the joyous fray!"
  "Quick throbs my brain,"--so burst the song,--
  To hear the strife once more.
  The mace, the axe, they rest too long;
  Earth cries, My thirst is sore.
  More blithely twang the strings of bows
  Than strings of harps in glee;
  Red wounds are lovelier than the rose
  Or rosy lips to me.

  "O, fairer than a field of flowers,
  When flowers in England grew,
  Would be the battle's marshalled powers,
  The plain of carnage new.
  With all its death before my soul
  The vision rises fair;
  Raise loud the song, and drain the bowl!
  I would that I were there!"

  Loud rang the harp, the minstrel's eye
  Rolled fiercely round the throng;
  It seemed two crashing hosts were nigh,
  Whose shock aroused the song.
  A golden cup King Guthrum gave
  To him who strongly played;
  And said, "I won it from the slave
  Who once o'er England swayed."

  King Guthrum cried, "'Twas Alfred's own;
  Thy song befits the brave:
  The King who cannot guard his throne
  Nor wine nor song shall have."
  The minstrel took the goblet bright,
  And said, "I drink the wine
  To him who owns by justest right
  The cup thou bid'st be mine.
  To him, your Lord, O shout ye all!
  His meed be deathless praise!
  The King who dares not nobly fall,
  Dies basely all his days."

  "The praise thou speakest," Guthrum said,
  "With sweetness fills mine ear;
  For Alfred swift before me fled,
  And left me monarch here.
  The royal coward never dared
  Beneath mine eye to stand.
  O, would that now this feast he shared,
  And saw me rule his land!"

  Then stern the minstrel rose, and spake,
  And gazed upon the King,--
  "Not now the golden cup I take,
  Nor more to thee I sing.
  Another day, a happier hour,
  Shall bring me here again:
  The cup shall stay in Guthrum's power,
  Till I demand it then."

  The Harper turned and left the shed,
  Nor bent to Guthrum's crown;
  And one who marked his visage said
  It wore a ghastly frown.
  The Danes ne'er saw that Harper more,
  For soon as morning rose,
  Upon their camp King Alfred bore,
  And slew ten thousand foes.

JOHN STERLING.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHEVY-CHACE.


[A modernized form of the old ballad of the "Hunting o' the Cheviot."
Some circumstances of the battle of Olter-bourne (A.D. 1388) are
woven into the ballad, and the affairs of the two events are
confounded. The ballad preserved in the "Percy Reliques" is probably
as old as 1574. The one following is not later than the time of
Charles II]


  God prosper long our noble king,
    Our lives and safeties all;
  A woful hunting once there did
    In Chevy-Chace befall.

  To drive the deer with hound and horn
    Earl Piercy took his way;
  The child may rue that is unborn
    The hunting of that day.

  The stout Earl of Northumberland
    A vow to God did make,
  His pleasure in the Scottish woods
    Three summer days to take,--

  The chiefest harts in Chevy-Chace
    To kill and bear away.
  These tidings to Earl Douglas came,
    In Scotland where he lay;

  Who sent Earl Piercy present word
    He would prevent his sport.
  The English earl, not fearing that,
    Did to the woods resort.

  With fifteen hundred bowmen bold,
    All chosen men of might,
  Who knew full well in time of need
    To aim their shafts aright.

  The gallant greyhounds swiftly ran
    To chase the fallow deer;
  On Monday they began to hunt,
    When daylight did appear;

  And long before high noon they had
    A hundred fat bucks slain;
  Then, having dined, the drovers went
    To rouse the deer again.

  The bowmen mustered on the hills,
    Well able to endure;
  And all their rear, with special care,
    That day was guarded sure.

  The hounds ran swiftly through the woods
    The nimble deer to take,
  That with their cries the hills and dales
    An echo shrill did make.

  Lord Piercy to the quarry went,
    To view the slaughtered deer;
  Quoth he, "Earl Douglas promised
    This day to meet me here;

  "But if I thought he would not come,
    No longer would I stay;"
  With that a brave young gentleman
    Thus to the earl did say:--

  "Lo, yonder doth Earl Douglas come,--
    His men in armor bright;
  Full twenty hundred Scottish spears
    All marching in our sight;

  "All men of pleasant Tividale,
    Fast by the river Tweed;"
  "Then cease your sports," Earl Piercy said,
    "And take your bows with speed;

  "And now with me, my countrymen,
    Your courage forth advance;
  For never was there champion yet,
    In Scotland or in France,

  "That ever did on horseback come,
    But if my hap it were,
  I durst encounter man for man,
    With him to break a spear."

  Earl Douglas on his milk-white steed,
    Most like a baron bold,
  Rode foremost of his company,
    Whose armor shone like gold.

  "Show me," said he, "whose men you be,
    That hunt so boldly here,
  That, without my consent, do chase
    And kill my fallow-deer."

  The first man that did answer make,
    Was noble Piercy, he--
  Who said, "We list not to declare,
    Nor show whose men we be:

  "Yet will we spend our dearest blood
    Thy chiefest harts to slay."
  Then Douglas swore a solemn oath,
    And thus in rage did say:--

  "Ere thus I will out-braved be,
    One of us two shall die;
  I know thee well, an earl thou art,--
    Lord Piercy, so am I.

  "But trust me, Piercy, pity it were,
    And great offence, to kill
  Any of these our guiltless men,
    For they have done no ill.

  "Let you and me the battle try,
    And set our men aside."
  "Accursed be he," Earl Piercy said,
    "By whom this is denied."

  Then stepped a gallant squire forth,
    Witherington was his name,
  Who said, "I would not have it told
    To Henry, our king, for shame,

  "That e'er my captain fought on foot,
    And I stood looking on.
  You two be earls," said Witherington,
    "And I a squire alone;

  "I'll do the best that do I may,
    While I have power to stand;
  While I have power to wield my sword
    I'll fight with heart and hand."

  Our English archers bent their bows,--
    Their hearts were good and true;
  At the first flight of arrows sent,
    Full fourscore Scots they slew.

  Yet stays Earl Douglas on the bent,
    As chieftain stout and good;
  As valiant captain, all unmoved,
    The shock he firmly stood.

  His host he parted had in three,
    As leader ware and tried;
  And soon his spearmen on their foes
    Bore down on every side.

  Throughout the English archery
    They dealt full many a wound;
  But still our valiant Englishmen
    All firmly kept their ground.

  And throwing straight their bows away,
    They grasped their swords so bright;
  And now sharp blows, a heavy shower,
    On shields and helmets light.

  They closed full fast on every side,--
    No slackness there was found;
  And many a gallant gentleman
    Lay gasping on the ground.

  In truth, it was a grief to see
    How each one chose his spear,
  And how the blood out of their breasts
    Did gush like water clear.

  At last these two stout earls did meet;
    Like captains of great might,
  Like lions wode, they laid on lode,
    And made a cruel fight.

  They fought until they both did sweat,
    With swords of tempered steel,
  Until the blood, like drops of rain,
    They trickling down did feel.

  "Yield thee, Lord Piercy," Douglas said,
    "In faith I will thee bring
  Where thou shalt high advanced be
    By James, our Scottish king.

  "Thy ransom I will freely give,
    And this report of thee,--
  Thou art the most courageous knight
    That ever I did see."

  "No, Douglas," saith Earl Piercy then,
    "Thy proffer I do scorn;
  I will not yield to any Scot
    That ever yet was born."

  With that there came an arrow keen
    Out of an English bow,
  Which struck Earl Douglas to the heart,--
    A deep and deadly blow;

  Who never spake more words than these:
    "Fight on, my merry men all;
  For why, my life is at an end;
    Lord Piercy sees my fall."

  Then leaving life, Earl Piercy took
    The dead man by the hand;
  And said, "Earl Douglas, for thy life
    Would I had lost my land.

  "In truth, my very heart doth bleed
    With sorrow for thy sake;
  For sure a more redoubted knight
    Mischance did never take."

  A knight amongst the Scots there was
    Who saw Earl Douglas die,
  Who straight in wrath did vow avenge
    Upon the Earl Piercy.

  Sir Hugh Mountgomery was he called,
    Who, with a spear full bright,
  Well mounted on a gallant steed,
    Ran fiercely through the fight;

  And past the English archers all,
    Without a dread or fear;
  And through Earl Piercy's body then
    He thrust his hateful spear.

  With such vehement force and might
    He did his body gore,
  The staff ran through the other side
    A large cloth-yard and more.

  So thus did both these nobles die,
    Whose courage none could stain.
  An English archer then perceived
    The noble earl was slain.

  He had a bow bent in his hand,
    Made of a trusty tree;
  An arrow of a cloth-yard long
    To the hard head haled he.

  Against Sir Hugh Mountgomery
    So right the shaft he set,
  The gray goose wing that was thereon
    In his heart's blood was wet.

  This fight did last from break of day
    Till setting of the sun;
  For when they rung the evening-bell
    The battle scarce was done.

  With stout Earl Piercy there were slain
    Sir John of Egerton,
  Sir Robert Ratcliff, and Sir John,
    Sir James, that bold baron.

  And with Sir George and stout Sir James,
    Both knights of good account.
  Good Sir Ralph Raby there was slain,
    Whose prowess did surmount.

  For Witherington my heart is woe
    That ever he slain should be,
  For when his legs were hewn in two,
    He knelt and fought on his knee.

  And with Earl Douglas there was slain
    Sir Hugh Mountgomery,
  Sir Charles Murray, that from the field
    One foot would never flee;

  Sir Charles Murray of Ratcliff, too,--
    His sister's son was he;
  Sir David Lamb, so well esteemed,
    But saved he could not be.

  And the Lord Maxwell in like case
    Did with Earl Douglas die:
  Of twenty hundred Scottish spears,
    Scarce fifty-five did fly.

  Of fifteen hundred Englishmen,
    Went home but fifty-three;
  The rest in Chevy-Chace were slain,
    Under the greenwood tree.

  Next day did many widows come,
    Their husbands to bewail;
  They washed their wounds in brinish tears.
    But all would not prevail.

  Their bodies, bathed in purple blood,
    They bore with them away;
  They kissed them dead a thousand times,
    Ere they were clad in clay.

  The news was brought to Edinburgh,
    Where Scotland's king did reign,
  That brave Earl Douglas suddenly
    Was with an arrow slain:

  "O heavy news," King James did say;
    "Scotland can witness be
  I have not any captain more
    Of such account as he."

  Like tidings to King Henry came
    Within as short a, space,
  That Piercy of Northumberland
    Was slain in Chevy-Chace:

  "Now God be with him," said our King,
    "Since 'twill no better be;
  I trust I have within my realm
    Five hundred as good as he:

  "Yet shall not Scots or Scotland say
    But I will vengeance take;
  I'll be revenged on them all
    For brave Earl Piercy's sake."

  This vow full well the king performed
    After at Humbledown;
  In one day fifty knights were slain
    With lords of high renown;

  And of the rest, of small account,
    Did many hundreds die:
  Thus endeth the hunting of Chevy-Chace,
    Made by the Earl Piercy.

  God save the king, and bless this land,
    With plenty, joy, and peace;
  And grant, henceforth, that foul debate
    'Twixt noblemen may cease.

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




SIR PATRICK SPENS.

[A confused echo of the Scotch expedition which should have brought
the Maid of Norway to Scotland, about 1285.]


  The king sits in Dunfermline town,
    Drinking the blude-red wine,
  "O whare will I get a skeely skipper,
    To sail this new ship of mine!"

  O up and spake an eldern knight,
    Sat at the king's right knee,--
  "Sir Patrick Spens is the best sailor,
    That ever sailed the sea."

  Our king has written a braid letter,
    And sealed it with his hand,
  And sent it to Sir Patrick Spens,
    Was walking on the strand.

  "To Noroway, to Noroway,
    To Noroway o'er the faem;
  The king's daughter of Noroway,
    'Tis thou maun bring her hame."

  The first word that Sir Patrick read,
    Sae loud loud laughed he;
  The neist word that Sir Patrick read,
    The tear blinded his e'e.

  "O wha is this has done this deed,
    And tauld the king o' me,
  To send us out, at this time of the year,
    To sail upon the sea?

  "Be it wind, be it weet, be it hail, be it sleet,
    Our ship must sail the faem;
  The king's daughter of Noroway,
    'Tis we must fetch her hame."

  They hoysed their sails on Monenday morn,
    Wi' a' the speed they may;
  They hae landed in Noroway,
    Upon a Wodensday.

  They hadna been a week, a week,
    In Noroway, but twae,
  When that the lords o' Noroway
    Began aloud to say,--

  "Ye Scottishmen spend a' our king's goud,
    And a' our queenis fee."
  "Ye lie, ye lie, ye liars loud!
    Fu' loud I hear ye lie.

  "For I brought as much white monic,
    As gane[A] my men and me,
  And I brought a half-fou[B] o' gude red goud,
    Out o'er the sea wi' me.

  "Make ready, make ready, my merrymen a'!
    Our gude ship sails the morn."
  "Now, ever alake, my master dear,
    I fear a deadly storm!

  "I saw the new moon, late yestreen,
    Wi' the auld moon in her arm;
  And, if we gang to sea, master,
    I fear we'll come to harm."

  They hadna sailed a league, a league,
    A league but barely three,
  When the lift grew dark, and the wind blew loud,
    And gurly grew the sea.

  The ankers brak, and the topmasts lap,
    It was sic a deadly storm;
  And the waves cam o'er the broken ship,
    Till a' her sides were torn.

  "O where will I get a gude sailor,
    To take my helm in hand,
  Till I get up to the tall top-mast,
    To see if I can spy land?"

  "O here am I, a sailor gude,
    To take the helm in hand,
  Till you go up to the tall top-mast;
    But I fear you'll ne'er spy land."

  He hadna gane a step, a step,
    A step but barely are,
  When a bout flew out of our goodly ship,
    And the salt sea it came in.

  "Gae, fetch a web o' silken claith,
    Another o' the twine,
  And wap them into our ship's side,
    And let na the sea come in."

  They fetched a web o' the silken claith,
    Another o' the twine,
  And they wapped them round that gude ship's side,
    But still the sea came in.

  O laith, laith, were our gude Scots lords
    To weet their cork-heeled shoon!
  But lang or a' the play was played,
    They wat their hats aboon.

  And mony was the feather-bed,
    That flattered on the faem;
  And mony was the gude lord's son,
    That never mair cam hame.

  The ladyes wrang their fingers white,
    The maidens tore their hair,
  A' for the sake of their true loves;
    For them they'll see na mair.

  O lang, lang, may the ladyes sit,
    Wi' their fans into their hand,
  Before they see Sir Patrick Spens
    Come sailing to the strand!

  And lang, lang, may the maidens sit,
    Wi' their goud kaims in their hair,
  A' waiting for their ain dear loves!
    For them they'll see na mair.

  O forty miles off Aberdeen,
    'Tis fifty fathoms deep,
  And there lies gude Sir Patrick Spens,
    Wi' the Scots lords at his feet.

[Footnote A: Suffice.]

[Footnote B: The eighth part of a peck.]

ANONYMOUS BALLAD

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DOUGLAS TRAGEDY.

[This ballad exists in Denmark, and in other European countries. The
Scotch point out Blackhouse, on the wild Douglas Burn, a tributary of
the Yarrow, as the scene of the tragedy.]


  "Rise up, rise up, now, Lord Douglas," she says,
    "And put on your armor so bright;
  Let it never be said, that a daughter of thine
    Was married to a lord under night.

  "Rise up, rise up, my seven bold sons,
    And put on your armor so bright,
  And take better care of your youngest sister,
    For your eldest's awa the last night."

  He's mounted her on a milk-white steed,
    And himself on a dapple grey,
  With a bugelet horn hung down by his side,
    And lightly they rade away.

  Lord William lookit o'er his left shoulder,
    To see what he could see,
  And there he spyed her seven brethren bold,
    Come riding over the lea.

  "Light down, light down, Lady Marg'ret," he said,
    "And hold my steed in your hand,
  Until that against your seven brothers bold,
    And your father, I mak a stand."

  She held his steed in her milk-white hand,
    And never shed one tear,
  Until that she saw her seven brethren fa',
    And her father hard fighting, who loved her so dear.

  "O hold your hand, Lord William!" she said,
    "For your strokes they are wond'rous sair;
  True lovers I can get many a ane,
    But a father I can never get mair."

  O she's ta'en out her handkerchief,
    It was o' the holland sae fine,
  And aye she dighted her father's bloody wounds,
    That were redder than the wine.

  "O chuse, O chuse, Lady Marg'ret," he said,
    "O whether will ye gang or bide?"
  "I'll gang, I'll gang, Lord William," she said,
    "For ye have left me no other guide."

  He's lifted her on a milk-white steed,
    And himself on a dapple grey,
  With a bugelet horn hung down by his side,
    And slowly they baith rade away.

  O they rade on, and on they rade,
    And a' by the light of the moon,
  Until they cam to yon wan water,
    And there they lighted down.

  They lighted down to tak a drink
    Of the spring that ran sae clear;
  And down the stream ran his gude heart's blood,
    And sair she gan to fear.

  "Hold up, hold up, Lord William," she says,
    "For I fear that you are slain!"
  "'Tis naething but the shadow of my scarlet cloak,
    That shines in the water sae plain."

  O they rade on, and on they rade,
    And a' by the light of the moon,
  Until they cam to his mother's ha' door,
    And there they lighted down.

  "Get up, get up, lady mother," he says,
    "Get up, and let me in!--
  Get up, get up, lady mother," he says,
    "For this night my fair ladye I've win.

  "O mak my bed, lady mother," he says,
    "O mak it braid and deep!
  And lay Lady Marg'ret close at my back,
    And the sounder I will sleep."

  Lord William was dead lang ere midnight,
    Lady Marg'ret lang ere day--
  And all true lovers that go thegither,
    May they have mair luck than they!

  Lord William was buried in St. Mary's kirk,
    Lady Margaret in Mary's quire;
  Out o' the lady's grave grew a bonny red rose,
    And out o' the knight's a brier.

  And they twa met, and they twa plat,
    And fain they wad be near;
  And a' the warld might ken right weel,
    They were twa lovers dear.

  But bye and rade the Black Douglas,
    And wow but he was rough!
  For he pulled up the bonny brier,
    And flang 'tin St. Mary's loch.

ANONYMOUS BALLAD.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE LAST HUNT.


  Oh, it's twenty gallant gentlemen
    Rode out to hunt the deer,
  With mirth upon the silver horn
    And gleam upon the spear;
  They galloped through the meadow-grass,
    They sought the forest's gloom,
  And loudest rang Sir Morven's laugh,
    And lightest tost his plume.
      There's no delight by day or night
        Like hunting in the morn;
      So busk ye, gallant gentlemen,
        And sound the silver horn!

  They rode into the dark greenwood
    By ferny dell and glade,
  And now and then upon their cloaks
    The yellow sunshine played;
  They heard the timid forest-birds
    Break off amid their glee,
  They saw the startled leveret,
    But not a stag did see.
      Wind, wind the horn, on summer morn!
        Though ne'er a buck appear,
      There's health for horse and gentleman
        A-hunting of the deer!

  They panted up Ben Lomond's side
    Where thick the leafage grew,
  And when they bent the branches back
    The sunbeams darted through;
  Sir Morven in his saddle turned,
    And to his comrades spake,
  "Now quiet! we shall find a stag
    Beside the Brownies' Lake.
      Then sound not on the bugle-horn,
        Bend bush and do not break,
      Lest ye should start the timid hart
        A-drinking at the lake."

  Now they have reached the Brownies' Lake,--
    A blue eye in the wood,--
  And on its brink a moment's space
    All motionless they stood;
  When, suddenly, the silence broke
    With fifty bowstrings' twang,
  And hurtling through the drowsy air
    Full fifty arrows sang.
      Ah, better for those gentlemen,
        Than horn and slender spear,
      Were morion and buckler true,
        A-hunting of the deer.

  Not one of that brave company
    Shall hunt the deer again;
  Some fell beside the Brownies' Pool,
    Some dropt in dell or glen;
  An arrow pierced Sir Morven's breast,
    His horse plunged in the lake,
  And swimming to the farther bank
    He left a bloody wake.
      Ah, what avails the silver horn,
        And what the slender spear?
      There's other quarry in the wood
        Beside the fallow deer!

  O'er ridge and hollow sped the horse
    Besprent with blood and foam,
  Nor slackened pace until at eve
    He brought his master home.
  How tenderly the Lady Ruth
    The cruel dart withdrew!
  "False Tirrell shot the bolt," she said,
    "That my Sir Morven slew!"
      Deep in the forest lurks the foe,
        While gayly shines the morn:
      Hang up the broken spear, and blow
        A dirge upon the horn.

WILLIAM ROSCOE THAYER _(Paul Hermes_).

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BALLAD OF AGINCOURT.

[1415.]


  Fair stood the wind for France,
  When we our sails advance,
  Nor now to prove our chance
      Longer will tarry;
  But putting to the main,
  At Kause, the mouth of Seine,
  With all his martial train,
      Landed King Harry,

  And taking many a fort,
  Furnished in warlike sort,
  Marched towards Agincourt
      In happy hour,--
  Skirmishing day by day
  With those that stopped his way,
  Where the French general lay
      With all his power,

  Which in his height of pride,
  King Henry to deride,
  His ransom to provide
      To the king sending;
  Which he neglects the while,
  As from a nation vile,
  Yet, with an angry smile,
      Their fall portending.

  And turning to his men,
  Quoth our brave Henry then:
  Though they to one be ten,
      Be not amazed;
  Yet have we well begun,
  Battles so bravely won
  Have ever to the sun
      By fame been raised.

  And for myself, quoth he,
  This my full rest shall be;
  England ne'er mourn for me,
      Nor more esteem me,
  Victor I will remain,
  Or on this earth lie slain;
  Never shall she sustain
      Loss to redeem me.

  Poitiers and Cressy tell,
  When most their pride did swell,
  Under our swords they fell;
      No less our skill is
  Than when our grandsire great,
  Claiming the regal seat,
  By many a warlike feat
      Lopped the French lilies.

  The Duke of York so dread
  The eager vaward led;
  With the main Henry sped,
      Amongst his henchmen,
  Excester had the rear,--
  A braver man not there:
  O Lord! how hot they were
      On the false Frenchmen!

  They now to fight are gone;
  Armor on armor shone;
  Drum now to drum did groan,--
      To hear was wonder;
  That with the cries they make
  The very earth did shake;
  Trumpet to trumpet spake,
      Thunder to thunder.

  Well it thine age became,
  O noble Erpingham!
  Which did the signal aim
      To our hid forces;
  When, from a meadow by,
  Like a storm, suddenly.
  The English archery
      Struck the French horses

  With Spanish yew so strong,
  Arrows a cloth-yard long,
  That like to serpents stung,
      Piercing the weather;
  None from his fellow starts,
  But playing manly parts,
  And, like true English hearts,
      Stuck close together.

  When down their bows they threw,
  And forth their bilboes drew,
  And on the French they flew,
      Not one was tardy;
  Arms were from shoulders sent;
  Scalps to the teeth were rent;
  Down the French peasants went;
      Our men were hardy.

  This while our noble king,
  His broadsword brandishing,
  Down the French host did ding,
      As to o'erwhelm it;
  And many a deep wound lent,
  His arms with blood besprent,
  And many a cruel dent
      Bruised his helmet.

  Glo'ster, that duke so good,
  Next of the royal blood,
  For famous England stood
      With his brave brother,
  Clarence, in steel so bright,
  Though but a maiden knight,
  Yet in that furious fight
      Scarce such another.

  Warwick in blood did wade;
  Oxford the foe invade,
  And cruel slaughter made,
    Still as they ran up.
  Suffolk his axe did ply;
  Beaumont and Willoughby
  Bare them right doughtily,
      Ferrers and Fanhope.

  Upon Saint Crispin's day
  Fought was this noble fray,
  Which fame did not delay
      To England to carry;
  O, when shall Englishmen
  With such acts fill a pen,
  Or England breed again
      Such a King Harry?

MICHAEL DRAYTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE KING TO HIS SOLDIERS BEFORE HARFLEUR.

[1415.]

FROM "KING HENRY V.," ACT III. SC. 1.


    Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more;
  Or close the wall up with our English dead!
  In peace, there's nothing so becomes a man,
  As modest stillness, and humility:
  But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
  Then imitate the action of the tiger;
  Stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood,
  Disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage:
  Then lend the eye a terrible aspect;
  Let it pry through the portage of the head,
  Like the brass cannon; let the brow o'erwhelm it,
  As fearfully as doth a galled rock
  O'erhang and jutty his confounded base,
  Swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean.
  Now set the teeth, and stretch the nostril wide;
  Hold hard the breath, and bend up every spirit
  To his full height!--On, on, you noblest English,
  Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof!
  Fathers, that, like so many Alexanders,
  Have, in these parts, from morn till even fought,
  And sheathed their swords for lack of argument.
  Dishonor not your mothers; now attest,
  That those whom you called fathers, did beget you!
  Be copy now to men of grosser blood,
  And teach them how to war!--And you, good yeomen,
  Whose limbs were made in England, show us here
  The mettle of your pasture; let us swear
  That you are worth your breeding: which I doubt not;
  For there is none of you so mean and base,
  That hath not noble lustre in your eyes.
  I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips,
  Straining upon the start. The game's afoot;
  Follow your spirit: and, upon this charge,
  Cry--God for Harry! England! and Saint George!

SHAKESPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CAVALIER'S SONG.


  A steed! a steed of matchlesse speed,
    A sword of metal keene!
  All else to noble heartes is drosse,
    All else on earth is meaue.
  The neighyinge of the war-horse prowde,
    The rowlinge of the drum,
  The clangor of the trumpet lowde,
    Be soundes from heaven that come;
  And oh! the thundering presse of knightes,
    Whenas their war-cryes swell,
  May tole from heaven an angel bright,
    And rouse a fiend from hell.

  Then mounte! then mounte, brave gallants all,
    And don your helmes amaine;
  Deathe's couriers, fame and honor, call
    Us to the field againe.
  No shrewish feares shall fill our eye
    When the sword-hilt's in our hand--
  Heart-whole we'll part, and no whit sighe
    For the fayrest of the land;
  Let piping swaine, and craven wight,
    Thus weepe and puling crye;
  Our business is like men to fight,
    And hero-like to die!

WILLIAM MOTHERWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




GIVE A ROUSE.


  King Charles, and who'll do him right now?
  King Charles, and who's ripe for fight now?
  Give a rouse: here's, in hell's despite now,
  King Charles!

  Who gave me the goods that went since?
  Who raised me the house that sank once?
  Who helped me to gold I spent since?
  Who found me in wine you drank once?

  _(Chorus)_

  _King Charles, and who'll do him right now?
  King Charles, and who's ripe for fight now?
  Give a rouse: here's, in hell's despite now,
  King Charles_!

  To whom used my boy George quaff else,
  By the old fool's side that begot him?
  For whom did he cheer and laugh else,
  While Noll's damned troopers shot him?

  _(Chorus)_

  _King Charles, and who'll do him right now?
  King Charles, and who's ripe for fight now?
  Give a rouse: here's, in hell's despite now,
  King Charles!_

ROBERT BROWNING.

       *       *       *       *       *




NASEBY.

[June, 1645.]

BY OBADIAH BIND-THEIR-KINGS-IN-CHAINS-AND-THEIR-NOBLES-WITH-
LINKS-OF-IRON; SERGEANT IN IRETON'S REGIMENT.


  O, wherefore come ye forth, in triumph from the north,
  With your hands and your feet and your raiment all red?
  And wherefore doth your rout send forth a joyous shout?
  And whence be the grapes of the wine-press that ye tread?

  O, evil was the root, and bitter was the fruit,
  And crimson was the juice of the vintage that we trod:
  For we trampled on the throng of the haughty and the strong,
  Who sate in the high places and slew the saints of God.

  It was about the noon of a glorious day of June,
  That we saw their banners dance and their cuirasses shine,
  And the man of blood was there, with his long essenced hair,
  And Astley, and Sir Marmaduke, and Rupert of the Rhine.

  Like a servant of the Lord, with his Bible and his sword,
  The General rode along us to form us to the fight;
  When a murmuring sound broke out, and swelled into a shout
  Among the godless horsemen upon the tyrant's right.

  And hark! like the roar of the billows on the shore,
  The cry of battle rises along their charging line!
  For God! for the cause!--for the Church! for the laws!
  For Charles, king of England, and Rupert of the Rhine!

  The furious German comes, with his clarions and his drums,
  His bravoes of Alsatia, and pages of Whitehall;
  They are bursting on our flanks. Grasp your pikes! Close your ranks!
  For Rupert never comes but to conquer, or to fall.

  They are here! They rush on! We are broken! We are gone!
  Our left is borne before them like stubble on the blast.
  O Lord, put forth thy might! O Lord, defend the right!
  Stand back to back, in God's name! and fight it to the last!

  Stout Skippon hath a wound; the centre hath given ground:
  Hark! hark! what means the trampling of horsemen on our rear?
  Whose banner do I see, boys? 'Tis he! thank God! 'tis he, boys!
  Bear up another minute! Brave Oliver is here.

  Their heads all stooping low, their points all in a row,
  Like a whirlwind on the trees, like a deluge on the dikes,
  Our cuirassiers have burst on the ranks of the Accurst,
  And at a shock have scattered the forest of his pikes.

  Fast, fast the gallants ride, in some safe nook to hide
  Their coward heads, predestined to rot on Temple Bar;
  And he,--he turns, he flies:--shame on those cruel eyes
  That bore to look on torture, and dare not look on war!

  Ho! comrades, scour the plain; and, ere ye strip the slain,
  First give another stab to make your search secure;
  Then shake from sleeves and pockets their broadpieces and lockets,
  The tokens of the wanton, the plunder of the poor.

  Fools! your doublets shone with gold, and your hearts were gay and bold,
  When you kissed your lily hands to your lemans to-day;
  And to-morrow shall the fox, from her chambers in the rocks,
  Lead forth her tawny cubs to howl above the prey.

  Where be your tongues that late mocked at heaven and hell and fate?
  And the fingers that once were so busy with your blades,
  Your perfumed satin clothes, your catches and your oaths!
  Your stage-plays and your sonnets, your diamonds and your spades?

  Down! down! forever down, with the mitre and the crown!
  With the Belial of the court, and the Mammon of the Pope!
  There is woe in Oxford halls; there is wail in Durham's stalls;
  The Jesuit smites his bosom; the bishop rends his cope.

  And she of the seven hills shall mourn her children's ills,
  And tremble when she thinks on the edge of England's sword;
  And the kings of earth in fear shall shudder when they hear
  What the hand of God hath wrought for the Houses and the Word!

THOMAS BABINGTON, LORD MACAULAY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE THREE SCARS.


  This I got on the day that Goring
  Fought through York, like a wild beast roaring--
  The roofs were black, and the streets were full,
  The doors built up with packs of wool;
  But our pikes made way through a storm of shot,
  Barrel to barrel till locks grew hot;
  Frere fell dead, and Lucas was gone,
  But the drum still beat and the flag went on.

  This I caught from a swinging sabre,
  All I had from a long night's labor;
  When Chester[A] flamed, and the streets were red,
  In splashing shower fell the molten lead,
  The fire sprang up, and the old roof split,
  The fire-ball burst in the middle of it;
  With a clash and a clang the troopers they ran,
  For the siege was over ere well began.

  This I got from a pistol butt
  (Lucky my head's not a hazel nut);
  The horse they raced, and scudded and swore;
  There were Leicestershire gantlemen, seventy score;
  Up came the "Lobsters," covered with steel--
  Down we went with a stagger and reel;
  Smash at the flag, I tore it to rag.
  And carried it off in my foraging bag.

[Footnote A: Siege of Chester, in the civil war, 1645.]

GEORGE WALTER THORNBURY.

       *       *       *       *       *




FONTENOY.

[May 11, 1745.]


  Thrice at the huts of Fontenoy the English column failed,
  And twice the lines of Saint Antoine the Dutch in vain assailed;
  For town and slope were filled with fort and flanking battery,
  And well they swept the English ranks and Dutch auxiliary.
  As vainly through De Barri's wood the British soldiers burst,
  The French artillery drove them back diminished and dispersed.
  The bloody Duke of Cumberland beheld with anxious eye,
  And ordered up his last reserve, his latest chance to try.
  On Fontenoy, on Fontenoy, how fast his generals ride!
  And mustering came his chosen troops like clouds at eventide.

  Six thousand English veterans in stately column tread;
  Their cannon blaze in front and flank, Lord Hay is at their head.
  Steady they step adown the slopes, steady they mount the hill,
  Steady they load, steady they fire, moving right onward still,
  Betwixt the wood and Fontenoy, as through a furnace-blast,
  Through rampart, trench, and palisade, and bullets showering fast;
  And on the open plain above they rose and kept their course,
  With ready fire and grim resolve that mocked at hostile force.
  Past Fontenoy, past Fontenoy, while thinner grow their ranks,
  They break as breaks the Zuyder Zee through Holland's ocean-banks.

  More idly than the summer flies, French tirailleurs rush round;
  As stubble to the lava-tide, French squadrons strew the ground;
  Bombshells and grape and round-shot tore, still on they marched and
          fired;
  Fast from each volley grenadier and voltigeur retired.
  "Push on my household cavalry," King Louis madly cried.
  To death they rush, but rude their shock, not unavenged they died.
  On through the camp the column trod--King Louis turned his rein.
  "Not yet, my liege," Saxe interposed; "the Irish troops remain."
  And Fontenoy, famed Fontenoy, had been a Waterloo,
  Had not these exiles ready been, fresh, vehement, and true.

  "Lord Clare," he said, "you have your wish; there are your Saxon foes!"
  The Marshal almost smiles to see how furiously he goes.
  How fierce the look these exiles wear, who're wont to be so gay!
  The treasured wrongs of fifty years are in their hearts to-day:
  The treaty broken ere the ink wherewith 'twas writ could dry;
  Their plundered homes, their ruined shrines, their women's parting cry;
  Their priesthood hunted down like wolves, their country overthrown--
  Each looks as if revenge for all were staked on him alone.
  On Fontenoy, on Fontenoy, nor ever yet elsewhere,
  Rushed on to fight a nobler band than these proud exiles were.

  O'Brien's voice is hoarse with joy, as, halting, he commands:
  "Fix bayonets--charge!" Like mountain-storm rush on those fiery bands.
  Thin is the English column now, and faint their volleys grow,
  Yet mustering all the strength they have, they make a gallant show.
  They dress their ranks upon the hill, to face that battle-wind!
  Their bayonets the breakers' foam, like rocks the men behind!
  One volley crashes from their line, when through the surging smoke,
  With empty guns clutched in their hands, the headlong Irish broke.
  On Fontenoy, on Fontenoy, hark to that fierce huzza!
  "Revenge! remember Limerick! dash down the Sacsanagh!"

  Like lions leaping at a fold, when mad with hunger's pang,
  Right up against the English line the Irish exiles sprang;
  Bright was their steel, 'tis bloody now, their guns are filled with
          gore;
  Through scattered ranks and severed files and trampled flags they tore.
  The English strove with desperate strength, paused, rallied, scattered,
          fled;
  The green hillside is matted close with dying and with dead.
  Across the plain and far away passed on that hideous wrack,
  While cavalier and fantassin dash in upon their track.
  On Fontenoy, on Fontenoy, like eagles in the sun,
  With bloody plumes the Irish stand--the field is fought and won!

THOMAS OSBORNE DAVIS.

       *       *       *       *       *




BATTLE OF THE BALTIC.

[April 2, 1801.]


  Of Nelson and the north
    Sing the glorious day's renown,
  When to battle fierce came forth
    All the might of Denmark's crown,
  And her arms along the deep proudly shone;
    By each gun the lighted brand
    In a bold determined hand,
    And the prince of all the land
  Led them on.

  Like leviathans afloat
    Lay their bulwarks on the brine;
  While the sign of battle flew
    On the lofty British line--
  It was ten of April morn by the chime.
    As they drifted on their path
    There was silence deep as death;
    And the boldest held his breath
  For a time.

  But the might of England flushed
    To anticipate the scene;
  And her van the fleeter rushed
    O'er the deadly space between.
  "Hearts of oak!" our captain cried; when each gun
    From its adamantine lips
    Spread a death-shade round the ships,
    Like the hurricane eclipse
  Of the sun.

  Again! again! again!
    And the havoc did not slack,
  Till a feeble cheer the Dane
    To our cheering sent us back;
  Their shots along the deep slowly boom--
    Then ceased--and all is wail,
    As they strike the shattered sail,
    Or in conflagration pale,
  Light the gloom.

  Out spoke the victor then,
    As he hailed them o'er the wave:
  "Ye are brothers! ye are men!
    And we conquer but to save;
  So peace instead of death let us bring;
    But yield, proud foe, thy fleet,
    With the crews, at England's feet,
    And make submission meet
  To our king."

  Then Denmark blessed our chief,
    That he gave her wounds repose;
  And the sounds of joy and grief
    From her people wildly rose,
  As death withdrew his shades from the day.
    While the sun looked smiling bright
    O'er a wide and woful sight,
    Where the fires of funeral light
  Died away.

  Now joy, old England, raise!
    For the tidings of thy might,
  By the festal cities' blaze,
    Whilst the wine-cup shines in light;
  And yet, amidst that joy and uproar,
    Let us think of them that sleep
    Full many a fathom deep,
    By thy wild and stormy steep,
  Elsinore!

  Brave hearts! to Britain's pride
    Once so faithful and so true,
  On the deck of fame that died,
    With the gallant good Riou--
  Soft sigh the winds of heaven o'er their grave!
    While the billow mournful rolls,
    And the mermaid's song condoles,
    Singing glory to the souls
  Of the brave!

THOMAS CAMPBELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




BURIAL OF SIR JOHN MOORE.

[Corunna, Spain, January 16, 1809.]


  Not a drum was heard, not a funeral note,
    As his corse to the rampart we hurried;
  Not a soldier discharged his farewell shot
    O'er the grave where our hero we buried.

  We buried him darkly, at dead of night,
    The sods with our bayonets turning;
  By the struggling moonbeams' misty light,
    And the lanthorn dimly burning.

  No useless coffin enclosed his breast,
    Not in sheet or in shroud we wound him;
  But he lay, like a warrior taking his rest,
    With his martial cloak around him.

  Few and short were the prayers we said,
    And we spoke not a word of sorrow;
  But we steadfastly gazed on the face that was dead,
    And we bitterly thought of the morrow.

  We thought, as we hollowed his narrow bed,
    And smoothed down his lonely pillow.
  That the foe and the stranger would tread o'er his head,
    And we far away on the billow!

  Lightly they'll talk of the spirit that's gone,
    And o'er his cold ashes upbraid him,
  But little he'll reck, if they let him sleep on
    In the grave where a Briton has laid him!

  But half of our heavy task was done,
    When the clock struck the hour for retiring;
  And we heard the distant and random gun
    That the foe was sullenly firing.

  Slowly and sadly we laid him down,
    From the field of his fame fresh and gory;
  We carved not a line, and we raised not a stone--
    But we left him alone with his glory.

CHARLES WOLFE.

       *       *       *       *       *




"PICCIOLA."


  It was a Sergeant old and gray,
     Well singed and bronzed from siege and pillage,
  Went tramping in an army's wake
     Along the turnpike of the village.

  For days and nights the winding host
     Had through the little place been marching,
  And ever loud the rustics cheered,
     Till every throat was hoarse and parching.

  The Squire and Farmer, maid and dame,
     All took the sight's electric stirring,
  And hats were waved and staves were sung,
     And kerchiefs white were countless whirring.

  They only saw a gallant show
     Of heroes stalwart under banners,
  And, in the fierce heroic glow,
    'Twas theirs to yield but wild hosannas.

  The Sergeant heard the shrill hurrahs,
     Where he behind in step was keeping;
  But glancing down beside the road
     He saw a little maid sit weeping.

  "And how is this?" he gruffly said,
     A moment pausing to regard her;--
  "Why weepest thou, my little chit?"
     And then she only cried the harder.

  "And how is this, my little chit?"
    The sturdy trooper straight repeated,
  "When all the village cheers us on,
    That you, in tears, apart are seated?

  "We march two hundred thousand strong,
    And that's a sight, my baby beauty,
  To quicken silence into song
    And glorify the soldier's duty."

  "It's very, very grand, I know,"
    The little maid gave soft replying;
  "And Father, Mother, Brother too,
    All say 'Hurrah' while I am crying;

  "But think--O Mr. Soldier, think,--
    How many little sisters' brothers
  Are going all away to fight
    And may be _killed_, as well as others!"

  "Why, bless thee, child," the Sergeant said,
    His brawny hand her curls caressing,
  "'Tis left for little ones like thee
    To find that War's not all a blessing."

  And "Bless thee!" once again he cried;
    Then cleared his throat and looked indignant,
  And marched away with wrinkled brow
    To stop the struggling tear benignaut.

  And still the ringing shouts went up
    From doorway, thatch, and fields of tillage;
  The pall behind the standard seen
    By one alone of all the village.

  The oak and cedar bend and writhe
    When roars the wind through gap and braken;
  But 'tis the tenderest reed of all
    That trembles first when Earth is shaken.

ROBERT HENRY NEWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




WATERLOO.

[June 15, 1815.]

FROM "CHILDE HAROLD," CANTO III.


    There was a sound of revelry by night,
    And Belgium's capital had gathered then
    Her beauty and her chivalry, and bright
    The lamps shone o'er fair women and brave men;
    A thousand hearts beat happily; and when
    Music arose with its voluptuous swell,
    Soft eyes looked love to eyes which spake again,
    And all went merry as a marriage-bell;
  But hush! hark! a deep sound strikes like a rising knell!

    Did ye not hear it?--No; 'twas but the wind,
    Or the car rattling o'er the stony street;
    On with the dance! let joy be unconfined!
    No sleep till morn, when Youth and Pleasure meet
    To chase the glowing Hours with flying feet,--
    But hark!--that heavy sound breaks in once more,
    As if the clouds its echo would repeat;
    And nearer, clearer, deadlier than before!
  Arm! arm! it is--it is--the cannon's opening roar!

    Within a windowed niche of that high hall
    Sate Brunswick's fated chieftain; he did hear
    That sound the first amidst the festival,
    And caught its tone with Death's prophetic ear;
    And when they smiled because he deemed it near,
    His heart more truly knew that peal too well
    Which stretched his father on a bloody bier,
    And roused the vengeance blood alone could quell:
  He rushed into the field, and, foremost fighting, fell.

    Ah! then and there was hurrying to and fro,
    And gathering tears, and tremblings of distress,
    And cheeks all pale which but an hour ago
    Blushed at the praise of their own loveliness;
    And there were sudden partings, such as press
    The life from out young hearts, and choking sighs
    Which ne'er might be repeated: who would guess
    If evermore should meet those mutual eyes
  Since upon night so sweet such awful morn could rise!

    And there was mounting in hot haste: the steed,
    The mustering squadron, and the clattering car,
    Went pouring forward with impetuous speed,
    And swiftly forming in the ranks of war;
    And the deep thunder peal on peal afar;
    And near, the beat of the alarming drum
    Roused up the soldier ere the morning star;
    While thronged the citizens with terror dumb,
  Or whispering with white lips,--"The foe! they come! they come!"

    And wild and high the "Cameron's gathering" rose,
    The war-note of Lochiel, which Albyn's hills
    Have heard,--and heard, too, have her Saxon foes:
    How in the noon of night that pibroch thrills
    Savage and shrill! But with the breath which fills
    Their mountain pipe, so fill the mountaineers
    With the fierce native daring which instills
    The stirring memory of a thousand years,
  And Evan's, Donald's fame, rings in each clansman's ears!

    And Ardennes waves above them her green leaves,
    Dewy with nature's tear-drops, as they pass,
    Grieving, if aught inanimate e'er grieves,
    Over the unreturning brave,--alas!
    Ere evening to be trodden like the grass
    Which now beneath them, but above shall grow
    In its next verdure, when this fiery mass
    Of living valor, rolling on the foe,
  And burning with high hope, shall moulder cold and low.

    Last noon beheld them full of lusty life,
    Last eve in Beauty's circle proudly gay,
    The midnight brought the signal sound of strife,
    The morn the marshalling in arms,--the day
    Battle's magnificently stern array!
    The thunder-clouds close o'er it, which when rent
    The earth is covered thick with other clay,
    Which her own clay shall cover, heaped and pent,
  Rider and horse,--friend, foe,--in one red burial blent!

    Their praise is hymned by loftier harps than mine;
    Yet one I would select from that proud throng,
    Partly because they blend me with his line,
    And partly that I did his sire some wrong,
    And partly that bright names will hallow song!
    And his was of the bravest, and when showered
    The death-bolts deadliest the thinned files along,
    Even where the thickest of war's tempest lowered,
  They reached no nobler breast than thine, young, gallant Howard!

    There have been tears and breaking hearts for thee,
    And mine were nothing, had I such to give;
    But when I stood beneath the fresh green tree,
    Which living waves where thou didst cease to live,
    And saw around me the wide field revive
    With fruits and fertile promise, and the Spring
    Come forth her work of gladness to contrive,
    With all her reckless birds upon the wing,
  I turned from all she brought to those she could not bring.

    I turned to thee, to thousands, of whom each
    And one as all a ghastly gap did make
    In his own kind and kindred, whom to teach
    Forgetfulness were mercy for their sake;
    The Archangel's trump, not glory's, must awake
    Those whom they thirst for; though the sound of Fame
    May for a moment soothe, it cannot slake
    The fever of vain longing, and the name
  So honored but assumes a stronger, bitterer claim.

    They mourn, but smile at length; and, smiling, mourn:
    The tree will wither long before it fall;
    The hull drives on, though mast and sail be torn;
    The roof-tree sinks, but moulders on the hall
    In massy hoariness; the ruined wall
    Stands when its wind-worn battlements are gone;
    The bars survive the captive they enthrall;
    The day drags through though storms keep out the sun;
  And thus the heart will break, yet brokenly live on;

    Even as a broken mirror, which the glass
    In every fragment multiplies, and makes
    A thousand images of one that was
    The same, and still the more, the more it breaks;
    And thus the heart will do which not forsakes,
    Living in shattered guise, and still, and cold,
    And bloodless, with its sleepless sorrow aches,
    Yet withers on till all without is old,
  Showing no visible sign, for such things are untold.

LORD BYRON.

       *       *       *       *       *




BY THE ALMA RIVER.

[September 20, 1854,]


  Willie, fold your little hands;
    Let it drop,--that "soldier" toy;
  Look where father's picture stands,--
    Father, that here kissed his boy
  Not a mouth since,--father kind,
  Who this night may (never mind
  Mother's sob, my Willie dear)
  Cry out loud that He may hear
  Who is God of battles,--cry,
  "God keep father safe this day
      By the Alma River!"

  Ask no more, child. Never heed
    Either Russ, or Frank, or Turk;
  Right of nations, trampled creed,
    Chance-poised victory's bloody work;
  Any flag i' the wind may roll
  On thy heights, Sevastopol!
  Willie, all to you and me
  Is that spot, whate'er it be,
  Where he stands--no other word--
  _Stands_--God sure the child's prayers heard--
      Near the Alma River.

  Willie, listen to the bells
    Ringing in the town to-day;
  That's for victory. No knell swells
    For the many swept away,--
  Hundreds, thousands. Let us weep,
  We, who need not,--just to keep
  Reason clear in thought and brain
  Till the morning comes again;
  Till the third dread morning tell
  Who they were that fought and--_fell_
      By the Alma River.

  Come, we'll lay us down, my child;
    Poor the bed is,--poor and hard;
  But thy father, far exiled,
    Sleeps upon the open sward,
  Dreaming of us two at home;
  Or, beneath the starry dome,
  Digs out trenches in the dark,
  Where he buries--Willie, mark!--
  Where _he buries_ those who died
  Fighting--fighting at his side--
      By the Alma River.

  Willie, Willie, go to sleep;
    God will help us, O my boy!
  He will make the dull hours creep
    Faster, and send news of joy;
  When I need not shrink to meet
  Those great placards in the street,
  That for weeks will ghastly stare
  In some eyes--child, say that prayer
  Once again,--a different one,--
  Say, "O God! Thy will be done
      By the Alma River."

DINAH MARIA MULOCK CRAIK.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE.

[October 25, 1854.]


  Half a league, half a league,
    Half a league onward.
  All in the valley of Death
    Rode the six hundred.
  "Forward, the Light Brigade!
  Charge for the guns!" he said;
  Into the valley of Death
    Rode the six hundred.

  "Forward, the Light Brigade!"
  Was there a man dismayed?
  Not though the soldier knew
    Some one had blundered:
  Theirs not to make reply,
  Theirs not to reason why.
  Theirs but to do and die:
  Into the valley of Death
    Rode the six hundred.

  Cannon to right of them,
  Cannon to left of them,
  Cannon in front of them
    Volleyed and thundered;
  Stormed at with shot and shell,
  Boldly they rode and well;
  Into the jaws of Death,
  Into the mouth of Hell,
    Rode the six hundred.

  Flashed all their sabres bare,
  Flashed as they turned in air,
  Sabring the gunners there,
  Charging an army, while
    All the world wondered:
  Plunged in the battery-smoke,
  Right through the line they broke:
  Cossack and Russian
  Reeled from the sabre-stroke,
    Shattered and sundered.
  Then they rode back, but not--
    Not the six hundred.

  Cannon to right of them,
  Cannon to left of them,
  Cannon behind them
    Volleyed and thundered:
  Stormed at with shot and shell,
  While horse and hero fell,
  They that had fought so well
  Came through the jaws of Death
  Back from the mouth of Hell,--
  All that was left of them,
    Left of six hundred.

  When can their glory fade?
  O the wild charge they made!
    All the world wondered.
  Honor the charge they made!
  Honor the Light Brigade,
    Noble six hundred!

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE RELIEF OF LUCKNOW.

[September 25, 1857.]

  O, that last day in Lucknow fort!
    We knew that it was the last;
  That the enemy's lines crept surely on.
    And the end was coming fast.

  To yield to that foe meant worse than death;
    And the men and we all worked on;
  It was one day more of smoke and roar,
    And then it would all be done.

  There was one of us, a corporal's wife,
    A fair, young, gentle thing,
  Wasted with fever in the siege.
    And her mind was wandering.

  She lay on the ground, in her Scottish plaid,
    And I took her head on my knee;
  "When my father comes hame frae the pleugh," she said,
    "Oh! then please wauken me."

  She slept like a child on her father's floor,
    In the flecking of woodbine-shade,
  When the house-dog sprawls by the open door,
    And the mother's wheel is stayed.

  It was smoke and roar and powder-stench,
    And hopeless waiting for death;
  And the soldier's wife, like a full-tired child,
    Seemed scarce to draw her breath.

  I sank to sleep; and I had my dream
    Of an English village-lane.
  And wall and garden;--but one wild scream
    Brought me back to the roar again.

  There Jessie Brown stood listening
    Till a sudden gladness broke
  All over her face; and she caught my hand
    And drew me near as she spoke:--

  "The Hielanders! O, dinna ye hear
    The slogan far awa,
  The McGregor's?--O, I ken it weel;
    It's the grandest o' them a'!

  "God bless thae bonny Hielanders!
    We're saved! we're saved!" she cried;
  And fell on her knees; and thanks to God
    Flowed forth like a full flood-tide.

  Along the battery-line her cry
    Had fallen among the men,
  And they started back;--they were there to die;
    But was life so near them, then?

  They listened for life; the rattling fire
    Far off, and the far-off roar,
  Were all; and the colonel shook his head,
    And they turned to their guns once more.

  But Jessie said, "The slogan's done;
    But winna ye hear it noo,
  _The Campbells are comin'_? It's no' a dream;
    Our succors hae broken through!"

  We heard the roar and the rattle afar,
    But the pipes we could not hear;
  So the men plied their work of hopeless war
    And knew that the end was near.

  It was not long ere it made its way,--
    A thrilling, ceaseless sound:
  It was no noise from the strife afar,
    Or the sappers under ground.

  It _was_ the pipes of the Highlanders!
    And now they played _Auld Lang Syne;_
  It came to our men like the voice of God,
    And they shouted along the line.

  And they wept, and shook one another's hands,
    And the women sobbed in a crowd;
  And every one knelt down where he stood,
    And we all thanked God aloud.

  That happy day, when we welcomed them,
    Our men put Jessie first;
  And the general gave her his hand, and cheers
    Like a storm from the soldiers burst.

  And the pipers' ribbons and tartan streamed,
    Marching round and round our line;
  And our joyful cheers were broken with tears,
    As the pipes played _Auld Long Syne_.

ROBERT T.S. LOWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




DANNY DEEVER.

  "What are the bugles blowin' for?" said Files-on-Parade.
  "To turn you out, to turn you out," the Color-Sergeant said.
  "What makes you look so white, so white?" said Files-on-Parade.
  "I'm dreadin' what I've got to watch," the Color-Sergeant said.
      For they're hangin' Danny Deever, you can hear the Dead March play,
      The regiment's in 'ollow square--they're hangin' him to-day;
      They've taken of his buttons off an' cut his stripes away,
      An' they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.

  "What makes the rear-rank breathe so 'ard?" said Files-on-Parade.
  "It's bitter cold, it's bitter cold," the Color-Sergeant said.
  "What makes that front-rank man fall down?" says Files-on-Parade.
  "A touch o' sun, a touch o' sun," the Color-Sergeant said.
      They are hangin' Danny Deever, they are marchin' of 'im round,
      They 'ave 'alted Danny Deever by 'is coffin on the ground;
      An' 'e'll swing in 'arf a minute for a sneakin' shootin' hound--
      O they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'!

  "'Is cot was right-'and cot to mine," said Files-on-Parade.
  "'E's sleepin' out an' far to-night," the Color-Sergeant said.
  "I've drunk 'is beer a score o' times," said Files-on-Parade.
  "'E's drinkin' bitter beer alone," the Color-Sergeant said.
      They are hangin' Danny Deever, you must mark 'im to 'is place,
      For 'e shot a comrade sleepin'--you must look 'im in the face;
      Nine 'undred of 'is county an' the regiment's disgrace,
      While they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.

  "What's that so black agin the sun?" said Files-on-Parade.
  "It's Danny fightin' 'ard for life," the Color-Sergeant said.
  "What's that that whimpers over'ead?" said Files-on-Parade.
  "It's Danny's soul that's passin' now," the Color-Sergeant said.
      For they're done with Danny Deever, you can 'ear the quickstep play,
      The regiment's in column, an' they're marchin' us away;
      Ho! the young recruits are shakin', an' they'll want their beer
          to-day,
      After hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.

RUDYARD KIPLING.

       *       *       *       *       *




WHERE ARE THE MEN?


  Where are the men who went forth in the morning,
    Hope brightly beaming in every face?
  Fearing no danger,--the Saxon foe scorning,--
    Little thought they of defeat or disgrace!
  Fallen is their chieftain--his glory departed--
    Fallen are the heroes who fought by his side!
  Fatherless children now weep, broken-hearted,
    Mournfully wandering by Rhuddlan's dark tide!

  Small was the band that escaped from the slaughter,
    Flying for life as the tide 'gan to flow;
  Hast thou no pity, thou dark rolling water?
    More cruel still than the merciless foe!
  Death is behind them, and death is before them;
    Faster and faster rolls on the dark wave;
  One wailing cry--and the sea closes o'er them;
    Silent and deep is their watery grave.

From the Welsh of TALIESSIN,
Translation of THOMAS OLIPHANT

       *       *       *       *       *




BRUCE AND THE SPIDER.

[About 1307.]


  For Scotland's and for freedom's right
    The Bruce his part had played,
  In five successive fields of fight
    Been conquered and dismayed;
  Once more against the English host
  His band he led, and once more lost
    The meed for which he fought;
  And now from battle, faint and worn,
  The homeless fugitive forlorn
    A hut's lone shelter sought.

  And cheerless was that resting-place
    For him who claimed a throne:
  His canopy, devoid of grace,
    The rude, rough beams alone;
  The heather couch his only bed,--
  Yet well I ween had slumber fled
    From couch of eider-down!
  Through darksome night till dawn of day,
  Absorbed in wakeful thoughts he lay
    Of Scotland and her crown.

  The sun rose brightly, and its gleam
    Fell on that hapless bed,
  And tinged with light each shapeless beam
    Which roofed the lowly shed;
  When, looking up with wistful eye,
  The Bruce beheld a spider try
    His filmy thread to fling
  From beam to beam of that rude cot;
  And well the insect's toilsome lot
    Taught Scotland's future king.

  Six times his gossamery thread
    The wary spider threw;
  In vain the filmy line was sped,
    For powerless or untrue
  Each aim appeared, and back recoiled
  The patient insect, six times foiled,
    And yet unconquered still;
  And soon the Bruce, with eager eye,
  Saw him prepare once more to try
    His courage, strength, and skill.

  One effort more, his seventh and last--
    The hero hailed the sign!--
  And on the wished-for beam hung fast
    That slender, silken line!
  Slight as it was, his spirit caught
  The more than omen, for his thought
    The lesson well could trace,
  Which even "he who runs may read,"
  That Perseverance gains its meed,
    And Patience wins the race.

BERNARD BARTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




BANNOCKBURN.

[June 24, 1314.]


  Scots, wha hae wi' Wallace bled,
  Scots, wham Bruce has aften led;
  Welcome to your gory bed,
     Or to victorie.

  Now's the day, and now's the hour
  See the front o' battle lour:
  See approach proud Edward's power,--
     Chains and slaverie!

  Wha will be a traitor knave?
  Wha can fill a coward's grave?
  Wha sae base as be a slave?
     Let him turn and flee!

  Wha for Scotland's king and law
  Freedom's sword will strongly draw,
  Freeman stand, or freeman fa'?
     Let him follow me!

  By Oppression's woes and pains!
  By our sons in servile chains,
  We will drain our dearest veins,
     But they shall be free!

  Lay the proud usurpers low!
  Tyrants fall in every foe!
  Liberty's in every blow!
     Let us do, or die!

ROBERT BURNS.

       *       *       *       *       *




SONG OF CLAN-ALPINE.

FROM "THE LADY OF THE LAKE," CANTO II.


    Loud a hundred clansmen raise
    Their voices in their chieftain's praise.
    Each boatman, bending to his oar,
    With measured sweep the burthen bore,
    In such wild cadence, as the breeze
    Makes through December's leafless trees.
    The chorus first could Allen know,
    "Roderigh Vich Alpine, ho! ieroe!"
    And near, and nearer, as they rowed,
    Distinct the martial ditty flowed.

  Hail to the Chief who in triumph advances!
    Honored and blessed be the evergreen Pine!
  Long may the tree, in his banner that glances,
    Flourish, the shelter and grace of our line!
        Heaven send it happy dew,
        Earth lend it sap anew,
    Gayly to bourgeon, and broadly to grow,
        While every Highland glen
        Sends our shouts back again,
    "Roderigh Vich Alpine dhu, ho! ieroe!"

  Ours is no sapling chance-sown by the fountain.
    Blooming at Beltane, in winter to fade;
  When the whirlwind has stripped every leaf on the mountain,
    The more shall Clan-Alpine exult in her shade.
        Moored in the rifted rock,
        Proof to the tempest's shock,
    Firmer he roots him the ruder it blow;
        Menteith and Breadalbane, then,
        Echo his praise again,
    "Roderigh Vich Alpine dhu, ho! ieroe!"

  Proudly our pibroch has thrilled in Glen Fruin,
    And Bannachar's groans to our slogan replied;
  Glen Luss and Ross-dhu, they are smoking in ruin,
    And the best of Loch-Lomond lie dead on her side.
        Widow and Saxon maid
        Long shall lament our raid,
    Think of Clan-Alpine with fear and with woe;
        Lennox and Leven-glen
        Shake when they hear again,
    "Roderigh Vich Alpine dhu, ho! ieroe!"

  Row, vassals, row, for the pride of the Highlands!
    Stretch to your oars for the evergreen Pine!
  O that the rosebud that graces yon islands
    Were wreathed in a garland around him to twine!
        O that some seedling gem,
        Worthy such noble stem,
  Honored and blessed in their shadow might grow!
        Loud should Clan-Alpine then
        Ring from the deepmost glen,
    "Roderigh Vich Alpine dhu, ho! ieroe!"

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




BEAL' AN DHUINE.

[1411.]

FROM "THE LADY OF THE LAKE," CANTO VI.


  There is no breeze upon the fern,
    No ripple on the lake,
  Upon her eyrie nods the erne,
    The deer has sought the brake;
  The small birds will not sing aloud,
    The springing trout lies still,
  So darkly glooms yon thunder-cloud,
  That swathes, as with a purple shroud,
    Benledi's distant hill.
  Is it the thunder's solemn sound
    That mutters deep and dread,
  Or echoes from the groaning ground
    The warrior's measured tread?
  Is it the lightning's quivering glance
    That on the thicket streams,
  Or do they flash on spear and lance
    The sun's retiring beams?
  I see the dagger crest of Mar,
    I see the Moray's silver star
  Wave o'er the cloud of Saxon war,
    That up the lake comes winding far!
  To hero bound for battle strife,
    Or bard of martial lay,
  'Twere worth ten years of peaceful life,
    One glance at their array!

  Their light-armed archers far and near
    Surveyed the tangled ground,
  Their centre ranks, with pike and spear,
    A twilight forest frowned,
  Their barbed horsemen, in the rear,
    The stern battalia crowned.
  No cymbal clashed, no clarion rang,
    Still were the pipe and drum;
  Save heavy tread, and armor's clang,
    The sullen march was dumb.
  There breathed no wind their crests to shake,
    Or wave their flags abroad;
  Scarce the frail aspen seemed to quake,
    That shadowed o'er their road.
  Their vaward scouts no tidings bring,
    Can rouse no lurking foe,
  Nor spy a trace of living thing,
    Save when they stirred the roe;
  The host moves like a deep sea wave,
  Where rise no rocks its pride to brave,
    High swelling, dark, and slow.
  The lake is passed, and now they gain
  A narrow and a broken plain,
  Before the Trosach's rugged jaws;
  And here the horse and spearmen pause,
  While, to explore the dangerous glen,
  Dive through the pass the archer men.

  At once there rose so wild a yell
  Within that dark and narrow dell.
  As all the fiends, from heaven that fell,
  Had pealed the banner cry of hell!
  Forth from the pass in tumult driven,
  Like chaff before the winds of heaven,
    The archery appear:
  For life! for life! their flight they ply--
  And shriek, and shout, and battle-cry,
  And plaids and bonnets waving high,
  And broadswords flashing to the sky,
    Are maddening in the rear.
  Onward they drive, in dreadful race,
    Pursuers and pursued;
  Before that tide of flight and chase,
  How shall it keep its rooted place,
    The spearmen's twilight wood?
  --"Down, down," cried Mar, "your lances down!
    Bear back both friend and foe!"
  Like reeds before the tempest's frown,
  That serried grove of lances brown
    At once lay levelled low;
  And closely shouldering side to side,
  The bristling ranks the onset bide.--
  --"We'll quell the savage mountaineer,
    As their Tinchel[A] cows the game;
  They come as fleet as forest deer,
    We'll drive them back as tame."

  Bearing before them, in their course,
  The relics of the archer force,
  Like wave with crest of sparkling foam,
  Right onward did Clan-Alpine come.
  Above the tide, each broadsword bright
  Was brandishing like beam of light,
    Each targe was dark below;
  And with the ocean's mighty swing,
  When heaving to the tempest's wing,
    They hurled them on the foe.

  I heard the lance's shivering crash,
  As when the whirlwind rends the ash;
  I heard the broadsword's deadly clang,
  As if a hundred anvils rang!
  But Moray wheeled his rearward flank--
  Of horsemen on Clan-Alpine's flank--
    "My bannerman, advance!
  I see," he cried, "their columns shake.
  Now, gallants! for your ladies' sake,
    Upon them with the lance!"
  The horsemen dashed among the rout,
    As deer break through the broom;
  Their steeds are stout, their swords are out,
    They soon make lightsome room.
  Clan-Alpine's best are backward borne--
    Where, where was Roderick then?
  One blast upon his bugle-horn
    Were worth a thousand men!
  And refluent through the pass of fear
    The battle's tide was poured;
  Vanished the Saxon's struggling spear,
    Vanished the mountain sword.
  As Bracklinn's chasm, so black and steep,
    Receives her roaring linn,
  As the dark caverns of the deep
    Suck the wild whirlpool in,
  So did the deep and darksome pass
  Devour the battle's mingled mass;
  None linger now upon the plain,
  Save those who ne'er shall fight again.

[Footnote A: A circle of sportsmen, surrounding the deer.]

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




PIBROCH OF DONUIL DHU.[A]

[Footnote A: Pipe-summons, or gathering-song, of Donald the Black.]

[1481.]


  Pibroch of Donuil Dhu,
    Pibroch of Donuil,
  Wake thy wild voice anew,
    Summon Clan Conuil.
  Come away, come away,
    Hark to the summons!
  Come in your war array,
    Gentles and commons.

  Come from deep glen, and
    From mountains so rocky;
  The war-pipe and pennon
    Are at Inverlochy.
  Come every hill-plaid, and
    True heart that wears one,
  Come every steel blade, and
    Strong hand that bears one.

  Leave untended the herd,
    The flock without shelter;
  Leave the corpse uninterred,
    The bride at the altar;
  Leave the deer, leave the steer,
    Leave nets and barges;
  Come with your fighting gear,
    Broadswords and targes.

  Come as the winds come, when
   Forests are rended;
  Come as the waves come, when
   Navies are stranded;
  Faster come, faster come.
   Faster and faster,
  Chief, vassal, page and groom,
   Tenant and master.

  Fast they come, fast they come;
   See how they gather!
  Wide waves the eagle plume
   Blended with heather.
  Cast your plaids, draw your blades,
   Forward each man set!
  Pibroch of Donuil Dhu,
   Knell for the onset!

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




FLODDEN FIELD.

[September, 1513.]

FROM "MARMION," CANTO VI.


  A moment then Lord Marmion stayed,
  And breathed his steed, his men arrayed,
    Then forward moved his band,
  Until, Lord Surrey's rear-guard won,
  He halted by a cross of stone,
  That, on a hillock standing lone,
    Did all the field command.

  Hence might they see the full array
  Of either host for deadly fray;
  Their marshalled lines stretched east and west,
    And fronted north and south,
  And distant salutation past
    From the loud cannon-mouth;
  Not in the close successive rattle
  That breathes the voice of modern battle,
    But slow and far between.--
  The hillock gained, Lord Marmion stayed:
  "Here, by this cross," he gently said,
    "You well may view the scene;
  Here shalt thou tarry, lovely Clare:
  O, think of Marmion in thy prayer!--
  Thou wilt not?--well,--no less my care
  Shall, watchful, for thy weal prepare.--
  You, Blount and Eustace, are her guard,
    With ten picked archers of my train;
  With England if the day go hard,
    To Berwick speed amain,--
  But, if we conquer, cruel maid,
  My spoils shall at your feet be laid,
    When here we meet again."
  He waited not for answer there,
  And would not mark the maid's despair,
    Nor heed the discontented look
  From either squire: but spurred amain,
  And, dashing through the battle-plain,
    His way to Surrey took.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Blount and Fitz-Eustace rested still
  With Lady Clare upon the hill;
  On which (for far the day was spent)
  The western sunbeams now were bent.
  The cry they heard, its meaning knew,
  Could plain their distant comrades view:
  Sadly to Blount did Eustace say,
  "Unworthy office here to stay!
  No hope of gilded spurs to-day.--
  But, see! look up,--on Flodden bent
  The Scottish foe has fired his tent."--
    And sudden, as he spoke,
  From the sharp ridges of the hill,
  All downward to the banks of Till
    Was wreathed in sable smoke.
  Volumed and vast, and rolling far,
  The cloud enveloped Scotland's war,
    As down the hill they broke;
  Nor martial shout, nor minstrel tone,
  Announced their march; their tread alone,
  At times their warning trumpet blown,
    At times a stifled hum,
  Told England, from his mountain-throne
    King James did rushing come.--
  Scarce could they hear or see their foes,
  Until at weapon-point they close.--
  They close in clouds of smoke and dust,
  With sword-sway and with lance's thrust;
    And such a yell was there,
  Of sudden and portentous birth,
  As if men fought upon the earth
   And fiends in upper air:
  O, life and death were in the shout,
  Recoil and rally, charge and rout,
    And triumph and despair.
  Long looked the anxious squires; their eye
  Could in the darkness naught descry.

  At length the freshening western blast
  Aside the shroud of battle cast;
  And, first, the ridge of mingled spears
  Above the brightened cloud appears;
  And in the smoke the pennons flew,
  As in the storm the white sea-mew.
  Then marked they, dashing broad and far,
  The broken billows of the war,
  And plumed crests of chieftains brave
  Floating like foam upon the wave;
    But naught distinct they see:
  Wide raged the battle on the plain;
  Spears shook, and falchions flashed amain;
  Fell England's arrow-flight like rain;
  Crests rose, and stooped, and rose again,
    Wild and disorderly.
  Amid the scene of tumult, high
  They saw Lord Marmion's falcon fly:
  And stainless Tunstall's banner white,
  And Edmund Howard's lion bright,
  Still bear them bravely in the fight;
    Although against them come
  Of gallant Gordons many a one,
  And many a stubborn Highlandman,
  And many a rugged Border clan,
    With Huntley and with Home.

  Far on the left, unseen the while,
  Stanley broke Lennox and Argyle;
  Though there the western mountaineer
  Rushed with bare bosom on the spear,
  And flung the feeble targe aside,
  And with both hands the broadsword plied,
  'Twas vain:--But Fortune, on the right,
  With fickle smile, cheered Scotland's fight.
  Then fell that spotless banner white,
    The Howard's lion fell;
  Yet still Lord Marmion's falcon flew
  With wavering flight, while fiercer grew
    Around the battle-yell.
  The Border slogan rent the sky!
  A Home! a Gordon! was the cry:
  Loud were the clanging blows;
  Advanced,--forced back,--now low, now high,
    The pennon sunk and rose;
  As bends the bark's mast in the gale,
  When rent are rigging, shrouds, and sail,
    It wavered mid the foes.
  No longer Blount the view could bear:--
  "By heaven and all its saints, I swear,
    I will not see it lost!
  Fitz-Eustace, you with Lady Clare
  May bid your beads, and patter prayer,--
    I gallop to the host."
  And to the fray he rode amain,
  Followed by all the archer train.
  The fiery youth, with desperate charge,
  Made, for a space, an opening large,
    The rescued banner rose.
  But darkly closed the war around.
  Like pine-tree rooted from the ground.
    It sunk among the foes.
  Then Eustace mounted too;--yet stayed,
  As loath to leave the helpless maid,
    When, fast as shaft can fly,
  Bloodshot his eyes, his nostrils spread,
  The loose rein dangling from his head,
  Housing and saddle bloody red,
    Lord Marmion's steed rushed by;
  And Eustace, maddening at the sight,
    A look and sign to Clara cast,
    To mark he would return in haste,
  Then plunged into the fight.

  Ask me not what the maiden feels,
    Left in that dreadful hour alone:
  Perchance her reason stoops or reels;
    Perchance a courage, not her own,
    Braces her mind to desperate tone.--
  The scattered van of England wheels;--
    She only said, as loud in air;
    The tumult roared, "Is Wilton there?"
    They fly, or, maddened by despair,
    Fight but to die,--"Is Wilton there?"
  With that, straight up the hill there rode;
    Two horsemen drenched with gore,
  And in their arms, a helpless load,
    A wounded knight they bore.
  His hand still strained the broken brand;
  His arms were smeared with blood and sand.
  Dragged from among the horses' feet,
  With dinted shield, and helmet beat,
  The falcon-crest and plumage gone,
  Can that be haughty Marmion!...
  Young Blount his armor did unlace,
  And, gazing on his ghastly face,
    Said,--"By Saint George, he's gone!
  That spear-wound has our master sped,--
  And see the deep cut on his head!
    Good night to Marmion."--
  "Unnurtured Blount! thy brawling cease:
  He opes his eyes," said Eustace; "peace!"

  When, doffed his casque, he felt free air,
  Around 'gan Marmion wildly stare:--
  "Where's Harry Blount? Fitz-Eustace where?
  Linger ye here, ye hearts of hare!
  Redeem my pennon,--charge again!
  Cry--'Marmion to the rescue!'--vain!
  Last of my race, on battle-plain
  That shout shall ne'er be heard again!--
  Yet my last thought is England's:--fly,
    To Dacre bear my signet-ring:
    Tell him his squadrons up to bring:--
  Fitz-Eustace, to Lord Surrey hie;
    Tunstall lies dead upon the field,
    His life-blood stains the spotless shield:
    Edmund is down;--my life is reft;--
    The Admiral alone is left.
    Let Stanley charge with spur of fire,--
    With Chester charge, and Lancashire,
    Full upon Scotland's central host,
    Or victory and England's lost.--
    Must I bid twice?--hence, varlets! fly!
    Leave Marmion here alone--to die."
    They parted, and alone he lay:
    Clare drew her from the sight away,
  Till pain rung forth a lowly moan,
  And half he murmured,--"Is there none,
    Of all my halls have nurst.
  Page, squire, or groom, one cup to bring,
  Of blessed water from the spring,
  To slake my dying thirst?"

  O woman! in our hours of ease,
  Uncertain, coy, and hard to please,
  And variable as the shade
  By the light quivering aspen made;
  When pain and anguish wring the brow,
  A ministering angel thou!--
  Scarce were the piteous accents said,
  When, with the Baron's casque, the maid
    To the nigh streamlet ran;
  Forgot were hatred, wrongs, and fears;
  The plaintive voice alone she hears,
    Sees but the dying man.
  She stooped her by the runnel's side,
    But in abhorrence backward drew;
  For, oozing from the mountain's side,
  Where raged the war, a dark-red tide
    Was curdling in the streamlet blue,
  Where shall she turn!--behold her mark
    A little fountain cell,
  Where water, clear as diamond-spark,
    In a stone basin fell.
  Above, some half-worn letters say,
  Drink : weary : pilgrim : drink : and : pray :
  for : the : kind : soul : of : Sybil : Gray :
    Who : built : this : cross : and : well :
  She filled the helm, and back she hied,
  And with surprise and joy espied
    A monk supporting Marmion's head;
  A pious man whom duty brought
  To dubious verge of battle fought,
    To shrive the dying, bless the dead.

  Deep drank Lord Marmion of the wave,
  And, as she stooped his brow to lave,--
  "Is it the hand of Clare," he said,
  "Or injured Constance, bathes my head?"
    Then, as remembrance rose,--
  "Speak not to me of shrift or prayer!
    I must redress her woes.
  Short space, few words, are mine to spare;
  Forgive and listen, gentle Clare!"--
    "Alas!" she said, "the while.--
  O, think of your immortal weal!
  In vain for Constance is your zeal;
    She--died at Holy Isle."--
  Lord Marmion started from the ground,
  As light as if he felt no wound;
  Though in the action burst the tide
  In torrents from his wounded side.
  "Then it was truth!" he said,--"I knew
  That the dark presage must be true.--
  I would the Fiend, to whom belongs
  The vengeance due to all her wrongs,
    Would spare me but a day!
  For wasting fire, and dying groan,
  And priests slain on the altar stone,
    Might bribe him for delay.
  It may not be!--this dizzy trance,--
  Curse on yon base marauder's lance,
  And doubly cursed my failing brand!
  A sinful heart makes feeble hand."
  Then, fainting, down on earth he sunk,
  Supported by the trembling monk.

  With fruitless labor, Clara bound,
  And strove to stanch the gushing wound:
  The monk, with unavailing cares,
  Exhausted all the Church's prayers.
  Ever, he said, that, close and near,
  A lady's voice was in his ear,
  And that the priest he could not hear,
    For that she ever sung,
  "_In the lost battle, borne down by the flying,
  Where mingles war's rattle with groans of the
       dying!_"
    So the notes rung:--
  "Avoid thee, Fiend!--with cruel hand,
  Shake not the dying sinner's sand!--
  O, look, my son, upon yon sign
  Of the Redeemer's grace divine:
    O, think on faith and bliss!--
  By many a death-bed I have been,
  And many a sinner's parting seen,
    But never aught like this."

  The war, that for a space did fail,
  Now trebly thundering swelled the gale,
    And STANLEY! was the cry:--
  A light on Marmion's visage spread,
    And fired his glazing eye:
  With dying hand above his head
  He shook the fragment of his blade,
    And shouted "Victory!--
  Charge, Chester, charge! On, Stanley, on!"
  Were the last words of Marmion.

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BONNETS OF BONNIE DUNDEE.

[About 1688.]


  To the lords of convention 'twas Claverhouse spoke,
  "Ere the king's crown shall fall, there are crowns to be broke;
  So let each cavalier who loves honor and me
  Come follow the bonnets of bonnie Dundee!"

  _Come fill up my cup, come fill up my can;
  Come saddle your horses, and call up your men;
  Come open the Westport and let us gang free,
  And it's room for the bonnets of bonnie Dundee_!

  Dundee he is mounted, he rides up the street,
  The bells are rung backward, the drums they are beat;
  But the provost, douce man, said, "Just e'en let him be,
  The gude toun is well quit of that deil of Dundee!"

  As he rode doun the sanctified bends of the Bow,
  Ilk carline was flyting and shaking her pow;
  But the young plants of grace they looked cowthie and slee,
  Thinking, Luck to thy bonnet, thou bonnie Dundee!

  With sour-featured whigs the Grass-market was thranged,
  As if half the west had set tryst to be hanged;
  There was spite in each look, there was fear in each ee,
  As they watched for the bonnets of bonnie Dundee.

  These cowls of Kilmarnock had spits and had spears,
  And lang-hafted gullies to kill cavaliers;
  But they shrunk to close-heads, and the causeway was free
  At the toss of the bonnet of bonnie Dundee.

  He spurred to the foot of the proud castle rock,
  And with the gay Gordon he gallantly spoke:
  "Let Mons Meg and her marrows speak twa words or three,
  For the love of the bonnet of bonnie Dundee."

  The Gordon demands of him which way he goes.
  "Where'er shall direct me the shade of Montrose!
  Your grace in short space shall hear tidings of me,
  Or that low lies the bonnet of bonnie Dundee.

  "There are hills beyond Pentland and lands beyond Forth;
  If there's lords in the Lowlands, there's chiefs in the north;
  There are wild Duniewassals three thousand times three
  Will cry 'Hoigh!' for the bonnet of bonnie Dundee.

  "There's brass on the target of barkened bull-hide,
  There's steel in the scabbard that dangles beside;
  The brass shall be burnished, the steel shall flash free,
  At a toss of the bonnet of bonnie Dundee.

  "Away to the hills, to the caves, to the rocks,
  Ere I own an usurper I'll couch with the fox;
  And tremble, false whigs, in the midst of your glee,
  You have not seen the last of my bonnet and me."

  He waved his proud hand, and the trumpets were blown,
  The kettle-drums clashed, and the horsemen rode on,
  Till on Ravelston's cliffs and on Clermiston's lea
  Died away the wild war-notes of bonnie Dundee.

  _Come fill up my cup, come fill up my can;
  Come saddle the horses, and call up the men;
  Come open your doors and let me gae free,
  For it's up with the bonnets of bonnie Dundee_!

SIR WALTER SCOTT.

       *       *       *       *       *



LIBERTY TREE.

[1775.]


  In a chariot of light from the regions of day,
    The Goddess of Liberty came;
  Ten thousand celestials directed the way,
    And hither conducted the dame.
  A fair budding branch from the gardens above,
    Where millions with millions agree,
  She brought in her hand as a pledge of her love,
    And the plant she named _Liberty Tree_.

  The celestial exotic struck deep in the ground,
    Like a native it flourished and bore;
  The fame of its fruit drew the nations around,
    To seek out this peaceable shore.
  Unmindful of names or distinction they came,
    For freemen like brothers agree;
  With one spirit endued, they one friendship pursued,
    And their temple was _Liberty Tree_.

  Beneath this fair tree, like the patriarchs of old,
    Their bread in contentment they ate,
  Unvexed with the troubles of silver and gold,
    The cares of the grand and the great.
  With timber and tar they Old England supplied,
    And supported her power on the sea;
  Her battles they fought, without getting a groat,
    For the honor of _Liberty Tree_.

  But hear, O ye swains, 'tis a tale most profane,
    How all the tyrannical powers,
  Kings, Commons, and Lords, are united amain.
    To cut down this guardian of ours;
  From the east to the west blow the trumpet to arms,
    Through the land let the sound of it flee,
  Let the far and the near, all unite with a cheer,
    In defence of our _Liberty Tree_.

THOMAS PAINE.

       *       *       *       *       *




HYMN:

SUNG AT THE COMPLETION OF THE CONCORD MONUMENT, APRIL 19, 1836.


  By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
    Their flag to April's breeze unfurled,
  Here once the embattled farmers stood,
    And fired the shot heard round the world.

  The foe long since in silence slept;
    Alike the conqueror silent sleeps;
  And Time the ruined bridge has swept
    Down the dark stream which seaward creeps.

  On this green bank, by this soft stream,
    We set to-day a votive stone;
  That memory may their deed redeem,
    When, like our sires, our sons are gone.

  Spirit, that made those heroes dare
    To die, or leave their children free,
  Bid Time and Nature gently spare
    The shaft we raise to them and thee.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




WARREN'S ADDRESS.[A]

[Footnote A: General Joseph Warren, who fell at the battle of Bunker
Hill, June 17, 1775.]


  Stand! the ground's your own, my braves!
  Will ye give it up to slaves?
  Will ye look for greener graves?
      Hope ye mercy still?
  What's the mercy despots feel?
  Hear it in that battle-peal!
  Read it on yon bristling steel!
      Ask it,--ye who will.

  Fear ye foes who kill for hire?
  Will ye to your _homes_ retire?
  Look behind you!--they're afire!
      And, before you, see
  Who have done it! From the vale
  On they come!--and will ye quail?
  Leaden rain and iron hail
      Let their welcome be!

  In the God of battles trust!
  Die we may,--and die we must:
  But, O, where can dust to dust
      Be consigned so well,
  As where heaven its dews shall shed
  On the martyred patriot's bed,
  And the rocks shall raise their head,
      Of his deeds to tell?

JOHN PIERPONT.

       *       *       *       *       *




"THE LONELY BUGLE GRIEVES."

FROM AN "ODE ON THE CELEBRATION OF THE
BATTLE OF BUNKER HILL, JUNE 17, 1825,"


      The trump hath blown,
    And now upon that reeking hill
  Slaughter rides screaming on the vengeful ball;
    While with terrific signal shrill,
  The vultures from their bloody eyries flown,
      Hang o'er them like a pall.
    Now deeper roll the maddening drums,
    And the mingling host like ocean heaves;
      While from the midst a horrid wailing comes,
  And high above the fight the lonely bugle grieves!

GRENVILLE MELLEN.

       *       *       *       *       *




NATHAN HALE.[A]

[Footnote A: Hanged as a spy by the British, in New York City,
September 22, 1776.]


  To drum-beat and heart-beat
    A soldier marches by:
  There is color in his cheek,
    There is courage in his eye,
  Yet to drum-beat and heart-beat
    In a moment he must die.

  By starlight and moonlight,
    He seeks the Briton's camp;
  He hears the rustling flag,
    And the armed sentry's tramp;
  And the starlight and moonlight
    His silent wanderings lamp.

  With slow tread and still tread,
    He scans the tented line;
  And he counts the battery guns
    By the gaunt and shadowy pine;
  And his slow tread and still tread
    Gives no warning sign.

  The dark wave, the plumed wave,
    It meets his eager glance;
  And it sparkles 'neath the stars,
    Like the glimmer of a lance--
  A dark wave, a plumed wave,
    On an emerald expanse.

  A sharp clang, a steel clang,
    And terror in the sound!
  For the sentry, falcon-eyed,
    In the camp a spy hath found;
  With a sharp clang, a steel clang,
    The patriot is bound.

  With calm brow, steady brow,
    He listens to his doom;
  In his look there is no fear,
    Nor a shadow-trace of gloom;
  But with calm brow and steady brow
    He robes him for the tomb.

  In the long night, the still night,
    He kneels upon the sod;
  And the brutal guards withhold
    E'en the solemn Word of God!
  In the long night, the still night,
    He walks where Christ hath trod.

  'Neath the blue morn, the sunny morn,
    He dies upon the tree;
  And he mourns that he can lose
    But one life for Liberty;
  And in the blue morn, the sunny morn,
    His spirit-wings are free.

  But his last words, his message-words,
    They burn, lest friendly eye
  Should read how proud and calm
    A patriot could die,
  With his last words, his dying words,
    A soldier's battle-cry.

  From Fame-leaf and Angel-leaf,
    From monument and urn,
  The sad of earth, the glad of heaven,
    His tragic fate shall learn;
  And on Fame-leaf and Angel-leaf
    The name of HALE shall burn!

FRANCIS MILES FINCH.

       *       *       *       *       *




SONG OF MARION'S MEN.[A]

[Footnote A: General Francis Marion, of South Carolina, renowned as a
daring patriot partisan leader during the Revolutionary War.]


  Our band is few, but true and tried,
    Our leader frank and bold;
  The British soldier trembles
    When Marion's name is told.
  Our fortress is the good greenwood,
    Our tent the cypress-tree;
  We know the forest round us,
    As seamen know the sea;
  We know its walls of thorny vines,
    Its glades of reedy grass,
  Its safe and silent islands
    Within the dark morass.

  Woe to the English soldiery
    That little dread us near!
  On them shall light at midnight
    A strange and sudden fear;
  When, waking to their tents on fire,
    They grasp their arms in vain,
  And they who stand to face us
    Are beat to earth again;
  And they who fly in terror deem
    A mighty host behind,
  And hear the tramp of thousands
    Upon the hollow wind.

  Then sweet the hour that brings release
    From danger and from toil;
  We talk the battle over,
    And share the battle's spoil.
  The woodland rings with laugh and shout,
    As if a hunt were up,
  And woodland flowers are gathered
    To crown the soldier's cup.
  With merry songs we mock the wind
    That in the pine-top grieves,
  And slumber long and sweetly
    On beds of oaken leaves.

  Well knows the fair and friendly moon
    The band that Marion leads,--
  The glitter of their rifles,
    The scampering of their steeds.
  'Tis life to guide the fiery barb
    Across the moonlight plain;
  'Tis life to feel the night-wind
    That lifts his tossing mane.
  A moment in the British camp--
    A moment--and away
  Back to the pathless forest,
    Before the peep of day.

  Grave men there are by broad Santee,
    Grave men with hoary hairs;
  Their hearts are all with Marion,
    For Marion are their prayers.
  And lovely ladies greet our band
    With kindliest welcoming,
  With smiles like those of summer,
    And tears like those of spring.
  For them we wear these trusty arms,
    And lay them down no more
  Till we have driven the Briton
    Forever from our shore.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

       *       *       *       *       *




CARMEN BELLICOSUM.


  In their ragged regimentals
  Stood the old Continentals,
      Yielding not.
  When the grenadiers were lunging,
  And like hail fell the plunging
      Cannon-shot;
      When the files
      Of the isles,
  From the smoky night encampment, bore the banner of the rampant
      Unicorn,
  And grummer, grummer, grummer rolled the roll of the drummer,
      Through the morn!

    Then with eyes to the front all,
    And with guns horizontal,
      Stood our sires;
    And the balls whistled deadly,
    And in streams flashing redly
      Blazed the fires;
      As the roar
      On the shore,
  Swept the strong battle-breakers o'er the green-sodded acres
      Of the plain;
  And louder, louder, louder, cracked the black gun-powder,
      Cracking amain!

    Now like smiths at their forges
    Worked the red St. George's
      Cannoneers;
    And the "villanous saltpetre"
    Rung a fierce, discordant metre
      Round their ears;
      As the swift
      Storm-drift,
  With hot sweeping anger, came the horseguards' clangor
      On our flanks;
  Then higher, higher, higher, burned the old fashioned fire
      Through the ranks!

    Then the bare-headed colonel
    Galloped through the white infernal
      Powder-cloud;
    And his broad sword was swinging
    And his brazen throat was ringing
      Trumpet-loud.
      Then the blue
      Bullets flew,
  And the trooper-jackets redden at the touch of the leaden
      Rifle-breath;
  And rounder, rounder, rounder, roared the iron six-pounder,
      Hurling death!

GUY HUMPHREY M'MASTER.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DANCE.

[Published soon after the surrender of Cornwallis.]


  Cornwallis led a country dance,
    The like was never seen, sir,
  Much retrogade and much advance,
    And all with General Greene, sir.

  They rambled up and rambled down,
    Joined hands, then off they run, sir.
  Our General Greene to Charlestown,
    The earl to Wilmington, sir.

  Greene in the South then danced a set.
    And got a mighty name, sir,
  Cornwallis jigged with young Fayette,
    But suffered in his fame, sir.

  Then down he figured to the shore,
    Most like a lordly dancer,
  And on his courtly honor swore
    He would no more advance, sir.

  Quoth he, my guards are weary grown
    With footing country dances,
  They never at St. James's shone,
    At capers, kicks, or prances.

  Though men so gallant ne'er were seen,
    While sauntering on parade, sir,
  Or wiggling o'er the park's smooth green,
    Or at a masquerade, sir.

  Yet are red heels and long-laced skirts,
    For stumps and briars meet, sir?
  Or stand they chance with hunting-shirts,
    Or hardy veteran feet, sir?

  Now housed in York, he challenged all,
    At minuet or all 'amande,
  And lessons for a courtly ball
    His guards by day and night conned.

  This challenge known, full soon there came
    A set who had the bon ton,
  De Grasse and Rochambeau, whose fame
    Fut brillant pour un long tems.

  And Washington, Columbia's son,
    Whom every nature taught, sir,
  That grace which can't by pains be won,
    Or Plutus's gold be bought, sir.

  Now hand in hand they circle round
    This ever-dancing peer, sir;
  Their gentle movements soon confound
    The earl as they draw near, sir.

  His music soon forgets to play--
    His feet can move no more, sir,
  And all his bands now curse the day
    They jigged to our shore, sir.

  Now Tories all, what can ye say?
    Come--is not this a griper,
  That while your hopes are danced away,
    'Tis you must pay the piper?

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




MONTEREY.

[Mexico, September 19, 1846.]


  We were not many,--we who stood
    Before the iron sleet that day;
  Yet many a gallant spirit would
    Give half his years if but he could
  Have been with us at Monterey.

  Now here, now there, the shot it hailed
    In deadly drifts of fiery spray,
  Yet not a single soldier quailed
  When wounded comrades round them wailed
    Their dying shouts at Monterey.

  And on, still on our column kept,
    Through walls of flame its withering way;
  Where fell the dead, the living stept,
  Still charging on the guns which swept
    The slippery streets of Monterey.

  The foe himself recoiled aghast,
    When striking where he strongest lay,
  We swooped his flanking batteries past,
  And, braving full their murderous blast,
    Stormed home the towers of Monterey.

  Our banners on those turrets wave,
    And there our evening bugles play;
  Where orange boughs above their grave,
  Keep green the memory of the brave
    Who fought and fell at Monterey.

  We are not many,--we who pressed
    Beside the brave who fell that day;
  But who of us has not confessed
  He'd rather share their warrior rest
    Than not have been at Monterey?

CHARLES FENNO HOFFMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




COMING.

[April, 1861.]


  World, art thou 'ware of a storm?
    Hark to the ominous sound;
  How the far-off gales their battle form,
    And the great sea-swells feel ground!

  It comes, the Typhoon of Death--
    Nearer and nearer it comes!
  The horizon thunder of cannon-breath
    And the roar of angry drums!

  Hurtle, Terror sublime!
    Swoop o'er the Land to-day--
  So the mist of wrong and crime,
  The breath of our Evil Time
    Be swept, as by fire, away!

HENRY HOWARD BROWNELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




IN STATE.


  I.

    O keeper of the Sacred Key,
    And the Great Seal of Destiny.
    Whose eye is the blue canopy.
  Look down upon the warring world, and tell us what the end will be.

    "Lo, through the wintry atmosphere.
    On the white bosom of the sphere,
    A cluster of five lakes appear;
  And all the land looks like a couch, or warrior's shield, or sheeted
          bier.

    "And on that vast and hollow field,
    With both lips closed and both eyes sealed,
    A mighty Figure is revealed,--
  Stretched at full length, and stiff and stark, as in the hollow of a
          shield.

    "The winds have tied the drifted snow
    Around the face and chin; and lo,
    The sceptred Giants come and go,
  And shake their shadowy crowns and say: 'We always feared it would
          be so!'

    "She came of an heroic race:
    A giant's strength, a maiden's grace,
    Like two in one seem to embrace,
  And match, and bend, and thorough-blend, in her colossal form and face.

    "Where can her dazzling falchion be?
    One hand is fallen in the sea;
    The Gulf Stream drifts it far and free;
  And in that hand her shining brand gleams from the depths resplendently.

    "And by the other, in its rest,
    The starry banner of the West
    Is clasped forever to her breast;
  And of her silver helmet, lo, a soaring eagle is the crest.

    "And on her brow, a softened light,
    As of a star concealed from sight
    By some thin veil of fleecy white,
  Or of the rising moon behind the raining vapors of the night.

    "The Sisterhood that was so sweet,
    The Starry System sphered complete,
    Which the mazed Orient used to greet,
  The Four-and-Thirty fallen Stars glimmer and glitter at her feet.

    "And over her,--and over all.
    For panoply and coronal,--
    The mighty Immemorial,
  And everlasting Canopy and Starry Arch and Shield of All.


  II.

    "Three cold, bright moons have marched and wheeled;
    And the white cerement that revealed
    A Figure stretched upon a Shield,
  Is turned to verdure; and the Land is now one mighty battle-field.

    "And lo, the children which she bred,
    And more than all else cherished,
    To make them true in heart and head,
  Stand face to face, as mortal foes, with their swords crossed above
          the dead.

    "Each hath a mighty stroke and stride:
    One true,--the more that he is tried;
    The other dark and evil-eyed;--
  And by the hand of one of them, his own dear mother surely died!

    "A stealthy step, a gleam of hell,--
    It is the simple truth to tell,--
    The Son stabbed and the Mother fell:
  And so she lies, all mute and pale, and pure and irreproachable!

    "And then the battle-trumpet blew;
    And the true brother sprang and drew
    His blade to smite the traitor through;
  And so they clashed above the bier, and the Night sweated bloody dew.

    "And all their children, far and wide,
    That are so greatly multiplied,
    Rise up in frenzy and divide;
  And choosing, each whom he will serve, unsheathe the sword and take
          their side.

    "And in the low sun's bloodshot rays,
    Portentous of the coming days,
    The Two great Oceans blush and blaze,
  With the emergent continent between them, wrapt in crimson haze.

    "Now whichsoever stand or fall,
    As God is great, and man is small,
    The Truth shall triumph over all:
  Forever and forevermore, the Truth shall triumph over all!


  III.

    "I see the champion sword-strokes flash;
    I see them fall and hear them clash;
    I hear the murderous engines crash;
  I see a brother stoop to loose a foeman-brother's bloody sash.

    "I see the torn and mangled corse,
    The dead and dying heaped in scores,
    The headless rider by his horse,
  The wounded captive bayoneted through and through without remorse.

    "I hear the dying sufferer cry,
    With his crushed face turned to the sky,
    I see him crawl in agony
  To the foul pool, and bow his head into bloody slime, and die.

    "I see the assassin crouch and fire,
    I see his victim fall,--expire;
    I see the murderer creeping nigher
  To strip the dead. He turns the head,--the face! The son beholds his
          sire!

    "I hear the curses and the thanks;
    I see the mad charge on the flanks,
    The rents, the gaps, the broken ranks,
  The vanquished squadrons driven headlong down the river's bridgeless
          banks.

    "I see the death-gripe on the plain,
    The grappling monsters on the main,
    The tens of thousands that are slain,
  And all the speechless suffering and agony of heart and brain.

    "I see the dark and bloody spots,
    The crowded rooms and crowded cots,
    The bleaching bones, the battle blots,--
  And writ on many a nameless grave, a legend of forget-me-nots.

    "I see the gorged prison-den,
    The dead line and the pent-up pen,
    The thousands quartered in the fen,
  The living-deaths of skin and bone that were the goodly shapes of men.

    "And still the bloody Dew must fall!
    And His great Darkness with the Pall
    Of His dread Judgment cover all,
  Till the Dead Nation rise Transformed by Truth to triumph over all!"

    "And Last--and Last I see--The Dead."
    Thus saith the Keeper of the Key,
    And the Great Seal of Destiny,
    Whose eye is the blue canopy,
  And leaves the Pall of His great Darkness over all the Land and Sea.

FORCEYTHE WILLSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




BROTHER JONATHAN'S LAMENT FOR
SISTER CAROLINE.

[March 25, 1861, South Carolina having adopted the Ordinance of
Secession.]


  She has gone,--she has left us in passion and pride--
  Our stormy-browed sister, so long at our side!
  She has torn her own star from our firmament's glow,
  And turned on her brother the face of a foe!

  O Caroline, Caroline, child of the sun,
  We can never forget that our hearts have been one,--
  Our foreheads both sprinkled in Liberty's name,
  From the fountain of blood with the finger of flame!

  You were always too ready to fire at a touch;
  But we said: "She is hasty--she does not mean much."
  We have scowled when you uttered some turbulent threat;
  But friendship still whispered: "Forgive and forget."

  Has our love all died out? Have its altars grown cold?
  Has the curse come at last which the fathers foretold?
  Then Nature must teach us the strength of the chain
  That her petulant children would sever in vain.

  They may fight till the buzzards are gorged with their spoil,--
  Till the harvest grows black as it rots in the soil,
  Till the wolves and the catamounts troop from their caves,
  And the shark tracks the pirate, the lord of the waves:

  In vain is the strife! When its fury is past,
  Their fortunes must flow in one channel at last,
  As the torrents that rush from the mountains of snow
  Roll mingled in peace in the valleys below.

  Our Union is river, lake, ocean, and sky;
  Man breaks not the medal when God cuts the die!
  Though darkened with sulphur, though cloven with steel,
  The blue arch will brighten, the waters will heal!

  O Caroline, Caroline, child of the sun,
  There are battles with fate that can never be won!
  The star-flowering banner must never be furled,
  For its blossoms of light are the hope of the world!

  Go, then, our rash sister, afar and aloof,--
  Run wild in the sunshine away from our roof;
  But when your heart aches and your feet have grown sore,
  Remember the pathway that leads to our door!

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.

       *       *       *       *       *




JONATHAN TO JOHN.


  It don't seem hardly right, John,
    When both my hands was full,
  To stump me to a fight, John,--
    Your cousin, tu, John Bull!
  Old Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    We know it now," sez he,
  "The Lion's paw is all the law,
    Accordin' to J.B.,
    Thet's fit for you and me!"

  You wonder why we're hot, John?
    Your mark wuz on the guns,
  The neutral guns, thet shot, John,
    Our brothers an' our sons:
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    There's human blood," sez he,
  "By fits an' starts, in Yankee hearts,
    Though 't may surprise J.B.
    More 'n it would you an' me."

  Ef I turned mad dogs loose, John,
    On _your_ front parlor stairs,
  Would it just meet your views, John,
    To wait an' sue their heirs?
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess,
    I on'y guess," sez he,
  "Thet ef Vattel on _his_ toes fell,
    'T would kind o' rile J.B.,
    Ez wal ez you an' me!"

  Who made the law thet hurts, John,
    _Heads I win--ditto tails_?
  "J.B." was on his shirts, John,
    Onless my memory fails.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    (I'm good at thet)," sez he,
  "Thet sauce for goose ain't _jest_ the juice
    For ganders with J.B.,
    No more 'n with you or me!"

  When your rights was our wrongs, John,
    You didn't stop for fuss,--
  Britanny's trident prongs, John,
    Was good 'nough law for us.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    Though physic's good," sez he,
  "It doesn't foller thet he can swaller
    Prescriptions signed 'J.B.'
    Put up by you an' me."

  We own the ocean, tu, John,
    You mus'n' take it hard,
  Ef we can't think with you, John,
    It's jest your own back yard.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    Ef _thet's_ his claim," sez he,
  "The fencin' stuff'll cost enough
    To bust up friend J.B.
    Ez wal ez you an' me!"

  Why talk so dreffle big, John,
    Of honor when it meant
  You didn't care a fig, John,
    But jest for _ten per cent_?
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    He's like the rest," sez he,
  "When all is done, it's number one
    Thet's nearest to J.B.,
    Ez wal ez t' you an' me!"

  We give the critters back, John,
    Cos Abram thought 'twas right;
  It warn't your bullyin' clack, John,
    Provokin' us to fight.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    We've a hard row," sez he,
  "To hoe just now; but thet, somehow,
    May happen to J.B.,
    Ez well ez you an' me!"

  We ain't so weak an' poor, John,
    With twenty million people,
  An' close to every door, John,
    A school house an' a steeple.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    It is a fact," sez he,
  "The surest plan to make a Man
    Is, think him so, J.B.,
    Ez much ez you an' me!"

  Our folks believe in Law, John;
    An' it's fer her sake, now,
  They've left the axe an' saw, John,
    The anvil an' the plow.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    Ef 't warn't fer law," sez he,
  "There'd be one shindy from here to Indy;
    An' _thet_ don't suit J.B.
    (When 'tain't 'twixt you an' me!)"

  We know we've got a cause, John,
    Thet's honest, just, an' true;
  We thought 't would win applause, John,
    Ef nowhere else, from you.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    His love of right," sez he,
  "Hangs by a rotten fibre o' cotton;
    There's natur' in J.B.,
    Ez well ez you an' me!"

  The South says, "_Poor folks down_!" John,
    An' "_All men up_!" say we,--
  White, yaller, black, an' brown, John;
    Now which is your idee?
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    John preaches wal," sez he;
  "But, sermon thru, an' come to _du_,
    Why there's the old J.B.
    A-crowdin' you an' me!"

  Shall it be love or hate, John?
    It's you thet's to decide;
  Ain't _your_ bonds held by Fate, John,
    Like all the world's beside?
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    Wise men fergive," sez he,
  "But not ferget; an' some time yet
    Thet truth may strike J.B.,
    Ez wal ez you an' me!"

  God means to make this land, John,
    Clear thru, from sea to sea,
  Believe an' understand, John,
    The _wuth_ o' bein' free.
  Ole Uncle S., sez he, "I guess
    God's price is high," sez he;
  "But nothin' else than wut he sells
    Wears long, an' thet J.B.
    May larn, like you an' me!"

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALL QUIET ALONG THE POTOMAC.


  "All quiet along the Potomac," they say,
    "Except now and then a stray picket
  Is shot, as he walks on his beat, to and fro,
    By a rifleman hid in the thicket.
  'Tis nothing: a private or two, now and then,
    Will not count in the news of the battle;
  Not an officer lost,--only one of the men,
    Moaning out, all alone, the death-rattle."

  All quiet along the Potomac to-night,
    Where the soldiers lie peacefully dreaming;
  Their tents in the rays of the clear autumn moon,
    Or the light of the watch-fires, are gleaming.
  A tremulous sigh, as the gentle night-wind
    Through the forest leaves softly is creeping;
  While stars up above, with their glittering eyes,
    Keep guard,--for the army is sleeping.

  There's only the sound of the lone sentry's tread
    As he tramps from the rock to the fountain,
  And he thinks of the two in the low trundle-bed,
    Far away in the cot on the mountain.
  His musket falls slack; his face, dark and grim,
    Grows gentle with memories tender,
  As he mutters a prayer for the children asleep,
    For their mother,--may Heaven defend her!

  The moon seems to shine just as brightly as then,
    That night when the love yet unspoken
  Leaped up to his lips,--when low, murmured vows
    Were pledged to be ever unbroken;
  Then drawing his sleeve roughly over his eyes,
    He dashes off tears that are welling,
  And gathers his gun closer up to its place,
    As if to keep down the heart-swelling.

  He passes the fountain, the blasted pine-tree,--
    The footstep is lagging and weary;
  Yet onward he goes, through the broad belt of light,
    Toward the shades of the forest so dreary.
  Hark! was it the night-wind that rustled the leaves?
    Was it moonlight so wondrously flashing?
  It looked like a rifle: "Ha! Mary, good-bye!"
    And the life-blood is ebbing and plashing.

  All quiet along the Potomac to-night,--
    No sound save the rush of the river;
  While soft falls the dew on the face of the dead,--
  The picket's off duty forever.

ETHELINDA ELLIOTT BEERS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE COUNTERSIGN.


  Alas the weary hours pass slow,
    The night is very dark and still,
  And in the marshes far below
    I hear the bearded whippoorwill.
  I scarce can see a yard ahead;
    My ears are strained to catch each sound;
  I hear the leaves about me shed,
    And the spring's bubbling through the ground.

  Along the beaten path I pace,
    Where white rags mark my sentry's track;
  In formless shrubs I seem to trace
    The foeman's form, with bending back;
  I think I see him crouching low--
    I stop and list--I stoop and peer,
  Until the neighboring hillocks grow
    To groups of soldiers far and near.

  With ready piece I wait and watch,
    Until my eyes, familiar grown,
  Detect each harmless earthen notch,
    And turn guerrillas into stone;
  And then amid the lonely gloom,
    Beneath the tall old chestnut trees,
  My silent marches I resume,
    And think of other times than these.

  "Halt! who goes there?" my challenge cry,
    It rings along the watchful line;
  "Relief!" I hear a voice reply--
    "Advance, and give the countersign!"
  With bayonet at the charge I wait--
    The corporal gives the mystic spell;
  With arms aport I charge my mate,
    Then onward pass, and all is well.

  But in the tent that night awake,
    I ask, if in the fray I fall,
  Can I the mystic answer make,
    When the angelic sentries call?
  And pray that Heaven may so ordain,
    Where'er I go, what fate be mine,
  Whether in pleasure or in pain,
    I still may have the countersign.

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




CIVIL WAR.


  "Rifleman shoot me a fancy shot
    Straight at the heart of yon prowling vidette;
  Ring me a ball in the glittering spot
    That shines on his breast like an amulet!"

  "Ah, captain! here goes for a fine-drawn bead,
    There's music around when my barrel's in tune!"
  Crack! went the rifle, the messenger sped,
    And dead from his horse fell the ringing dragoon.

  "Now, rifleman, steal through the bushes, and snatch
    From your victim some trinket to handsel first blood;
  A button, a loop, or that luminous patch
    That gleams in the moon like a diamond stud!"

  "O captain! I staggered, and sunk on my track,
    When I gazed on the face of that fallen vidette,
  For he looked so like you, as he lay on his back,
    That my heart rose upon me, and masters me yet.

  "But I snatched off the trinket,--this locket of gold;
    An inch from the centre my lead broke its way,
  Scarce grazing the picture, so fair to behold,
    Of a beautiful lady in bridal array."

  "Ha! rifleman, fling me the locket!--'tis she,
    My brother's young bride, and the fallen dragoon
  Was her husband--Hush! soldier, 'twas Heaven's decree,
    We must bury him there, by the light of the moon!

  "But hark! the far bugles their warnings unite;
    War is a virtue,--weakness a sin;
  There's a lurking and loping around us to-night,
    Load again, rifleman, keep your hand in!"

CHARLES DAWSON SHANLY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE TWO WIVES.


  The colonel rode by his picket-line
    In the pleasant morning sun,
  That glanced from him far off to shine
    On the crouching rebel picket's gun.

  From his command the captain strode
    Out with a grave salute,
  And talked with the colonel as he rode:--
    The picket levelled his piece to shoot.

  The colonel rode and the captain walked,--
    The arm of the picket tired;
  Their faces almost touched as they talked,
    And, swerved from his aim, the picket fired.

  The captain fell at the horse's feet,
    Wounded and hurt to death,
  Calling upon a name that was sweet
    As God is good, with his dying breath.

  And the colonel that leaped from his horse and knelt
    To close the eyes so dim,
  A high remorse for God's mercy felt,
    Knowing the shot was meant for him.

  And he whispered, prayer-like, under his breath,
    The name of his own young wife:
  For Love, that had made his friend's peace with Death,
    Alone could make his with life.

WILLIAM DEAN HOWELLS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THREE HUNDRED THOUSAND MORE.

[September, 1861;]


  We are coming, Father Abraham, three hundred thousand more!
  From Mississippi's winding stream and from New England's shore;
  We leave our ploughs and workshops, our wives and children dear,
  With hearts too full for utterance, with but a silent tear;
  We dare not look behind us, but steadfastly before:
  We are coming, Father Abraham, three hundred thousand more!

  If you look across the hill-tops that meet the northern sky,
  Long moving lines of rising dust your vision may descry;
  And now the wind, an instant, tears the cloudy veil aside,
  And floats aloft our spangled flag in glory and in pride,
  And bayonets in the sunlight gleam, and bands brave music pour:
  We are coming, Father Abraham, three hundred thousand more!

  If you look all up our valleys where the growing harvests shine,
  You may see our sturdy farmer boys fast forming into line;
  And children from their mother's knees are pulling at the weeds,
  And learning how to reap and sow against their country's needs;
  And a farewell group stands weeping at every cottage door:
  We are coming, Father Abraham, three hundred thousand more!

  You have called us, and we're coming, by Richmond's bloody tide
  To lay us down, for Freedom's sake, our brothers' bones beside,
  Or from foul treason's savage grasp to wrench the murderous blade,
  And in the face of foreign foes its fragments to parade.
  Six hundred thousand loyal men and true have gone before:
  We are coming, Father Abraham, three hundred thousand more!

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE OLD MAN AND JIM.


  Old man never had much to say--
    'Ceptin' to Jim,--
  And Jim was the wildest boy he had,
    And the old man jes' wrapped up in him!
  Never heerd him speak but once
  Er twice in my life,--and first time was
  When the army broke out, and Jim he went,
  The old man backin' him, fer three months;
  And all 'at I heerd the old man say
  Was jes' as we turned to start away,--
    "Well, good-bye, Jim:
    Take keer of yourse'f!"

  'Peared like he was more satisfied
    Jes' _lookin'_ at Jim
  And likin' him all to hisse'f-like, see?--
    'Cause he was jes' wrapped up in him!
  And over and over I mind the day
  The old man come and stood round in the way
  While we was drillin', a-watchin' Jim;
  And down at the deepot a heerin' him say,--
    "Well, good-bye, Jim:
    Take keer of yourse'f!"

  Never was nothin' about the farm
    Disting'ished Jim;
  Neighbors all ust to wonder why
    The old man 'peared wrapped up in him:
  But when Cap. Biggler, he writ back
  'At Jim was the bravest boy we had
  In the whole dern rigiment, white er black,
  And his fightin' good as his farmin' bad,--
  'At he had led, with a bullet clean
  Bored through his thigh, and carried the flag
  Through the bloodiest battle you ever seen,--
  The old man wound up a letter to him
  'At Cap. read to us, 'at said,--"Tell Jim Good-bye;
    And take keer of hisse'f!"

  Jim come home jes' long enough
    To take the whim
  'At he'd like to go back in the calvery--
    And the old man jes' wrapped up in him!
  Jim 'lowed 'at he'd had sich luck afore,
  Guessed he'd tackle her three years more.
  And the old man give him a colt he'd raised,
  And follered him over to Camp Ben Wade,
  And laid around fer a week er so,
  Watchin' Jim on dress-parade;
  'Tel finally he rid away,
  And last he heerd was the old man say,--
    "Well, good-bye, Jim:
    Take keer of yourse'f"

  Tuk the papers, the old man did,
    A-watchin' fer Jim,
  Fully believin' he'd make his mark
    _Some_ way--jes' wrapped up in him!
  And many a time the word 'ud come
  'At stirred him up like the tap of a drum:
  At Petersburg fer instunce, where
  Jim rid right into their cannons there,
  And tuk 'em, and p'inted 'em t' other way,
  And socked it home to the boys in gray,
  As they skooted fer timber, and on and on--
  Jim a lieutenant,--and one arm gone,--
  And the old man's words in his mind all day,--
    "Well, good-bye, Jim:
    Take keer of yourse'f!"

  Think of a private, now, perhaps,
    We'll say like Jim,
  'At's clumb clean up to the shoulder-straps--
    And the old man jes' wrapped up in him!
  Think of him--with the war plum' through,
  And the glorious old Red-White-and-Blue
  A-laughin' the news down over Jim,
  And the old man, bendin' over him--
  The surgeon turnin' away with tears
  'At hadn't leaked fer years and years,
  As the hand of the dyin' boy clung to
  His Father's, the old voice in his ears,--
    "Well, good-bye, Jim:
    Take keer of yourse'f!"

JAMES WHITCOMB RILEY.

       *       *       *       *       *




STONEWALL JACKSON'S WAY


  Come, stack arms, men; pile on the rails;
    Stir up the camp-fire bright!
  No growling if the canteen fails:
    We'll make a roaring night.
  Here Shenandoah brawls along,
  There burly Blue Ridge echoes strong,
  To swell the Brigade's rousing song,
    Of Stonewall Jackson's Way.

  We see him now--the queer slouched hat,
    Cocked o'er his eye askew;
  The shrewd, dry smile; the speech so pat,
    So calm, so blunt, so true.
  The "Blue-light Elder" knows 'em well:
  Says he, "That's Banks; he's fond of shell.--
  Lord save his soul! we'll give him--;" Well,
    That's Stonewall Jackson's Way.

  Silence! Ground arms! Kneel all! Caps off!
    Old Massa's going to pray.
  Strangle the fool that dares to scoff:
    Attention!--it's his way.
  Appealing from his native sod,
  _In forma pauperis_ to God.
  "Lay bare Thine arm! Stretch forth Thy rod:
    Amen!"--That's Stonewall's Way.

  He's in the saddle now. Fall in!
    Steady! the whole brigade.
  Hill's at the ford, cut off; we'll win
    His way out, ball and blade.
  What matter if our shoes are worn?
  What matter if our feet are torn?
  Quick step! we're with him before morn:
    That's Stonewall Jackson's Way.

  The sun's bright lances rout the mists
    Of morning; and--By George!
  Here's Longstreet, struggling in the lists,
    Hemmed in an ugly gorge.
  Pope and his Dutchmen!--whipped before.
  "Bay'nets and grape!" hear Stonewall roar.
  Charge, Stuart! Pay off Ashby's score,
    In Stonewall Jackson's Way.

  Ah, Maiden! wait and watch and yearn
    For news of Stonewall's band.
  Ah, Widow! read, with eyes that burn,
    That ring upon thy hand.
  Ah, Wife! sew on, pray on, hope on!
  Thy life shall not be all forlorn.
  The foe had better ne'er been born,
    That gets in Stonewall's Way.

JOHN WILLIAMSON PALMER

       *       *       *       *       *




BARBARA FRIETCHIE.


  Up from the meadows rich with corn,
  Clear in the cool September morn.

  The clustered spires of Frederick stand
  Green-walled by the hills of Maryland.

  Round about them orchards sweep.
  Apple and peach trees fruited deep,

  Fair as a garden of the Lord
  To the eyes of the famished rebel horde,

  On that pleasant morn of the early fall
  When Lee marched over the mountain wall,--

  Over the mountains, winding down,
  Horse and foot into Frederick town.

  Forty flags with their silver stars,
  Forty flags with their crimson bars,

  Flapped in the morning wind: the sun
  Of noon looked down, and saw not one.

  Tip rose old Barbara Frietchie then,
  Bowed with her fourscore years and ten;

  Bravest of all in Frederick town,
  She took up the flag the men hauled down;

  In her attic-window the staff she set,
  To show that one heart was loyal yet.

  Up the street came the rebel tread,
  Stonewall Jackson riding ahead.

  Under his slouched hat left and right
  He glanced: the old flag met his sight.

  "Halt!"--the dust-brown ranks stood fast;
  "Fire!"--out blazed the rifle-blast.

  It shivered the window, pane and sash;
  It rent the banner with seam and gash.

  Quick, as it fell, from the broken staff
  Dame Barbara snatched the silken scarf;

  She leaned far out on the window-sill,
  And shook it forth with a royal will.

  "Shoot, if you must, this old gray head,
  But spare your country's flag," she said.

  A shade of sadness, a blush of shame,
  Over the face of the leader came;

  The nobler nature within him stirred
  To life at that woman's deed and word:

  "Who touches a hair of yon gray head
  Dies like a dog! March on!" he said.

  All day long through Frederick street
  Sounded the tread of marching feet;

  All day long that free flag tost
  Over the heads of the rebel host.

  Ever its torn folds rose and fell
  On the loyal winds that loved it well;

  And through the hill-gaps sunset light
  Shone over it with a warm good-night.

  Barbara Frietchie's work is o'er.
  And the rebel rides on his raids no more.

  Honor to her! and let a tear
  Fall, for her sake, on Stonewall's bier.

  Over Barbara Frietchie's grave,
  Flag of freedom and union, wave!

  Peace and order and beauty draw
  Round thy symbol of light and law;

  And ever the stars above look down
  On thy stars below in Frederick town!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAVALRY SONG.
FROM "ALICE OF MONMOUTH."


  Our good steeds snuff the evening air,
    Our pulses with their purpose tingle;
  The foeman's fires are twinkling there;
    He leaps to hear our sabres jingle!
          HALT!
  Each carbine send its whizzing ball:
  Now, cling! clang! forward all,
        Into the fight!

  Dash on beneath the smoking dome:
  Through level lightnings gallop nearer!
  One look to Heaven! No thoughts of home:
  The guidons that we bear are dearer.
         CHARGE!
  Cling! clang! forward all!
  Heaven help those whose horses fall:
     Cut left and right!

  They flee before our fierce attack!
    They fall! they spread in broken surges.
  Now, comrades, bear our wounded back,
    And leave the foeman to his dirges.
          WHEEL!
  The bugles sound the swift recall:
  Cling! clang! backward all!
      Home, and good night!

EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




CAVALRY SONG.

  Our bugles sound gayly. To horse and away!
  And over the mountains breaks the day;
  Then ho! brothers, ho! for the ride or the fight,
  There are deeds to be done ere we slumber to-night!
    _And whether we fight or whether we fall
       By sabre-stroke or rifle-ball,
       The hearts of the free will remember us yet,
       And our country, our country will never forget!_

  Then mount and away! let the coward delight
  To be lazy all day and safe all night;
  Our joy is a charger, flecked with foam,
  And the earth is our bed and the saddle our home!
    _And whether we fight,_ etc.

  See yonder the ranks of the traitorous foe,
  And bright in the sunshine bayonets glow!
  Breathe a prayer, but no sigh; think for what you would fight;
  Then charge! with a will, boys, and God for the right!
    _And whether we fight_, etc.

  We have gathered again the red laurels of war;
  We have followed the traitors fast and far;
  But some who rose gayly this morn with the sun
  Lie bleeding and pale on the field they have won!
  _But whether we fight or whether we fall
  By sabre-stroke or rifle-ball,
  The hearts of the free will remember us yet,
  And our country, our country will never forget_!

ROSSITER W. RAYMOND.

       *       *       *       *       *




KEARNY AT SEVEN PINES.[A]

[Footnote A: Major-General Philip Kearny, killed at the battle of
Chantilly, September 1, 1862.]


  So that soldierly legend is still on its journey,--
    That story of Kearny who knew not to yield!
  'Twas the day when with Jameson, fierce Berry, and Birney,
    Against twenty thousand he rallied the field.
  Where the red volleys poured, where the clamor rose highest,
    Where the dead lay in clumps through the dwarf oak and pine,
  Where the aim from the thicket was surest and nighest,--
    No charge like Phil Kearny's along the whole line.

  When the battle went ill, and the bravest were solemn,
    Near the dark Seven Pines, where we still held our ground,
  He rode down the length of the withering column,
    And his heart at our war-cry leapt up with a bound;
  He snuffed, like his charger, the wind of the powder,--
    His sword waved us on and we answered the sign:
  Loud our cheer as we rushed, but his laugh rang the louder,
    "There's the devil's own fun, boys, along the whole line!"

  How he strode his brown steed! How we saw his blade brighten
    In the one hand still left,--and the reins in his teeth!
  He laughed like a boy when the holidays heighten.
    But a soldier's glance shot from his visor beneath.
  Up came the reserves to the mellay infernal,
    Asking where to go in,--through the clearing or pine?
  "O, anywhere! Forward! 'Tis all the same, Colonel:
    You'll find lovely fighting along the whole line!"

  O, evil the black shroud of night at Chantilly,
    That hid him from sight of his brave men and tried!
  Foul, foul sped the bullet that clipped the white lily,
    The flower of our knighthood, the whole army's pride!
  Yet we dream that he still,--in that shadowy region
    Where the dead form their ranks at the wan drummer's sign,--
  Rides on, as of old, down the length of his legion,
    And the word still is Forward! along the whole line.

EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GENERAL'S DEATH.


  The general dashed along the road
    Amid the pelting rain;
  How joyously his bold face glowed
    To hear our cheers' refrain!

  His blue blouse flapped in wind and wet,
    His boots were splashed with mire,
  But round his lips a smile was set,
    And in his eyes a fire.

  A laughing word, a gesture kind,--
    We did not ask for more,
  With thirty weary miles behind,
    A weary fight before.

  The gun grew light to every man,
    The crossed belts ceased their stress,
  As onward to the column's van
    We watched our leader press.

  Within an hour we saw him lie,
    A bullet in his brain,
  His manly face turned to the sky,
    And beaten by the rain.

JOSEPH O'CONNOR.

       *       *       *       *       *



DIRGE FOB A SOLDIER[A]

[Footnote A: Major-General Philip Kearny.]


  Close his eyes; his work is done!
    What to him is friend or foeman,
  Rise of moon or set of sun,
    Hand of man or kiss of woman?
      Lay him low, lay him low,
      In the clover or the snow!
      What cares he? he cannot know;
        Lay him low!

  As man may, he fought his fight,
    Proved his truth by his endeavor;
  Let him sleep in solemn night,
    Sleep forever and forever.
      Lay him low, lay him low,
      In the clover or the snow!
      What cares he? he cannot know;
        Lay him low!

  Fold him in his country's stars,
    Roll the drum and fire the volley!
  What to him are all our wars?--
    What but death-bemocking folly?
      Lay him low, lay him low,
      In the clover or the snow!
      What cares he? he cannot know;
        Lay him low!

  Leave him to God's watching eye;
    Trust him to the hand that made him.
  Mortal love weeps idly by;
    God alone has power to aid him.
      Lay him low, lay him low,
      In the clover or the snow!
      What cares he? he cannot know;
        Lay him low!

GEORGE HENRY BOKER.

       *       *       *       *       *




BAY BILLY.

[December 15, 1862.]


  'Twas the last fight at Fredericksburg,--
    Perhaps the day you reck,
  Our boys, the Twenty-Second Maine,
    Kept Early's men in check.
  Just where Wade Hampton boomed away
    The fight went neck and neck.

  All day the weaker wing we held,
    And held it with a will.
  Five several stubborn times we charged
    The battery on the hill,
  And five times beaten back, re-formed,
    And kept our column still.

  At last from out the centre fight
    Spurred up a general's aide:
  "That battery must silenced be!"
    He cried, as past he sped.
  Our colonel simply touched his cap,
    And then, with measured tread,

  To lead the crouching line once more
    The grand old fellow came.
  No wounded man but raised his head
    And strove to gasp his name,
  And those who could not speak nor stir,
    "God blessed him" just the same.

  For he was all the world to us,
    That hero gray and grim.
  Right well we knew that fearful slope
    We'd climb with none but him,
  Though while his white head led the way
    We'd charge hell's portals in.

  This time we were not half-way up.
    When, midst the storm of shell,
  Our leader, with his sword upraised,
    Beneath our bayonets fell.
  And, as we bore him back, the foe
    Set up a joyous yell.

  Our hearts went with him. Back we swept,
    And when the bugle said
  "Up, charge again!" no man was there
    But hung his dogged head.
  "We've no one left to lead us now,"
    The sullen soldiers said.

  Just then before the laggard line
    The colonel's horse we spied,
  Bay Billy with his trappings on,
    His nostrils swelling wide,
  As though still on his gallant back
    The master sat astride.

  Right royally he took the place
    That was of old his wont,
  And with a neigh that seemed to say,
    Above the battle's brunt,
  "How can the Twenty-Second charge
    If I am not in front?"

  Like statues rooted there we stood,
    And gazed a little space,
  Above that floating mane we missed
    The dear familiar face,
  But we saw Bay Billy's eye of fire,
    And it gave us heart of grace.

  No bugle-call could rouse us all
    As that brave sight had done,
  Down all the battered line we felt
    A lightning impulse run.
  Up! up the hill we followed Bill,--
    And we captured every gun!

  And when upon the conquered height
    Died out the battle's hum,
  Vainly mid living and the dead
    We sought our leader dumb.
  It seemed as if a spectre steed
    To win that day had come.

  And then the dusk and dew of night
    Fell softly o'er the plain,
  As though o'er man's dread work of death
    The angels wept again,
  And drew night's curtain gently round
    A thousand beds of pain.

  All night the surgeons' torches went,
    The ghastly rows between,--
  All night with solemn step I paced
    The torn and bloody green.
  But who that fought in the big war
    Such dread sights have not seen?

  At last the morning broke. The lark
    Sang in the merry skies,
  As if to e'en the sleepers there
    It bade awake, and rise!
  Though naught but that last trump of all
    Could ope their heavy eyes.

  And then once more with banners gay,
    Stretched out the long brigade.
  Trimly upon the furrowed field
    The troops stood on parade,
  And bravely mid the ranks were closed
    The gaps the fight had made.

  Not half the Twenty-Second's men
    Were in their place that morn;
  And Corporal Dick, who yester-noon
    Stood six brave fellows on,
  Now touched my elbow in the ranks,
    For all between were gone.

  Ah I who forgets that dreary hour
    When, as with misty eyes,
  To call the old familiar roll
    The solemn sergeant tries,--
  One feels that thumping of the heart
    As no prompt voice replies.

  And as in faltering tone and slow
    The last few names were said,
  Across the field some missing horse
    Toiled up the weary tread.
  It caught the sergeant's eye, and quick
    Bay Billy's name he read.

  Yes! there the old bay hero stood,
    All safe from battle's harms,
  And ere an order could be heard,
    Or the bugle's quick alarms,
  Down all the front, from end to end,
    The troops presented arms!

  Not all the shoulder-straps on earth
    Could still our mighty cheer;
  And ever from that famous day,
    When rang the roll call clear,
  Bay Billy's name was read, and then
    The whole line answered, "Here!"

FRANK H. GASSAWAY.

       *       *       *       *       *




WOUNDED TO DEATH.


      Steady, boys, steady!
      Keep your arms ready,
  God only knows whom we may meet here.
      Don't let me be taken;
      I'd rather awaken,
  To-morrow, in--no matter where,
  Than lie in that foul prison-hole--over there.
        Step slowly!
        Speak lowly!
    These rocks may have life.
      Lay me down in this hollow;
    We are out of the strife.
  By heavens! the foemen may track me in blood,
  For this hole in my breast is outpouring a flood.
  No! no surgeon for me; he can give me no aid;
  The surgeon I want is pickaxe and spade.
  What, Morris, a tear? Why, shame on ye, man!
  I thought you a hero; but since you began
  To whimper and cry like a girl in her teens,
  By George! I don't know what the devil it means!
  Well! well! I _am_, rough; 'tis a very rough school,
  This life of a trooper,--but yet I'm no fool!
  I know a brave man, and a friend from a foe;
  And, boys, that you love me I certainly know;
    But wasn't it grand
  When they came down the hill over sloughing and sand!
  But we stood--did we not?--like immovable rock,
  Unheeding their balls and repelling their shock.
    Did you mind the loud cry
    When, as turning to fly,
  Our men sprang upon them, determined to die?
      O, wasn't it grand!

  God help the poor wretches that fell in that fight;
  No time was there given for prayer or for flight;
  They fell by the score, in the crash, hand to hand,
  And they mingled their blood with the sloughing and sand.
        Huzza!
  Great Heavens! this bullet-hole gapes like a grave;
  A curse on the aim of the traitorous knave!
  Is there never a one of ye knows how to pray,
  Or speak for a man as his life ebbs away?
        Pray!
          Pray!
  Our Father! our Father!... why don't ye proceed?
  Can't you see I am dying? Great God, how I bleed!
  Ebbing away!
    Ebbing away!
      The light of day
      Is turning to gray.
        Pray!
          Pray!
  Our Father in Heaven,--boys, tell me the rest,
  While I stanch the hot blood from this hole in my breast.
  There's something about the forgiveness of sin--
  Put that in! put that in!--and then
  I'll follow your words and say an amen.

  Here, Morris, old fellow, get hold of my hand;
  And, Wilson, my comrade--O, wasn't it grand
  When they came down the hill like a thunder-charged cloud!
  Where's Wilson, my comrade?--Here, stoop down your head;
  Can't _you_ say a short prayer for the dying and dead!
    "Christ God, who died for sinners all,
      Hear thou this suppliant wanderer's cry;
    Let not e'en this poor sparrow fall
      Unheeded by thy gracious eye.

    "Throw wide thy gates to let him in,
      And take him, pleading, to thine arms;
    Forgive, O Lord! his life-long sin.
      And quiet all his fierce alarms."

  God bless you, my comrade, for saying that hymn;
  It is light to my path when my eye has grown dim.
  I am dying--bend down till I touch you once more--
  Don't forget me, old fellow,--God prosper this war!
  Confusion to traitors!--keep hold of my hand--
  And float the OLD FLAG o'er a prosperous land!

JOHN W. WATSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




SOMEBODY'S DARLING.


  Into a ward of the whitewashed halls
    Where the dead and the dying lay,
  Wounded by bayonets, shells, and balls,
    Somebody's darling was borne one day--
  Somebody's darling, so young and brave;
    Wearing yet on his sweet pale face--
  Soon to be hid in the dust of the grave--
    The lingering light of his boyhood's grace.

  Matted and damp are the curls of gold
    Kissing the snow of that fair young brow;
  Pale are the lips of delicate mould--
    Somebody's darling is dying now.
  Back from his beautiful blue-veined brow
    Brush his wandering waves of gold;
  Cross his hands on his bosom now--
    Somebody's darling is still and cold.

  Kiss him once for somebody's sake,
    Murmur a prayer soft and low;
  One bright curl from its fair mates take--
    They were somebody's pride, you know.
  Somebody's hand hath rested here--
    Was it a mother's, soft and white?
  Or have the lips of a sister fair
    Been baptized in their waves of light?

  God knows best. He has somebody's love,
    Somebody's heart enshrined him there,
  Somebody wafts his name above,
    Night and morn, on the wings of prayer.
  Somebody wept when he marched away,
    Looking so handsome, brave, and grand;
  Somebody's kiss on his forehead lay,
    Somebody clung to his parting hand.

  Somebody's watching and waiting for him,
    Yearning to hold him again to her heart;
  And there he lies with his blue eyes dim,
    And the smiling, childlike lips apart.
  Tenderly bury the fair young dead--
    Pausing to drop on his grave a tear.
  Carve on the wooden slab o'er his head:
    "Somebody's darling slumbers here."

MARIA LA CONTE.

       *       *       *       *       *




TRAMP, TRAMP, TRAMP.


  In the prison cell I sit,
    Thinking, mother dear, of you,
  And our bright and happy home so far away,
    And the tears they fill my eyes,
  Spite of all that I can do,
    Tho' I try to cheer my comrades and be gay.

  _Trump, tramp, tramp, the 'boys are marching,
    Oh, cheer up, comrades, they will come,
  And beneath the starry flag we shall breathe the air again,
    Of freedom in our own beloved home._

  In the battle front we stood
    When the fiercest charge they made,
  And they swept us off a hundred men or more,
    But before we reached their lines
  They were beaten back dismayed,
    And we heard the cry of vict'ry o'er and o'er,--

  _Chorus._

  So within the prison cell
    We are waiting for the day
  That shall come to open wide the iron door,
    And the hollow eye grows bright,
  And the poor heart almost gay,
    As we think of seeing friends and home once more.

  _Tramp, tramp, tramp, the boys are marching,
    Oh, cheer up, comrades, they 'will come,_
  _And beneath the starry flag we shall breathe the air again,
  Of freedom in our own beloved home._

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR ORDERS.


  Weave no more silks, ye Lyons looms,
    To deck our girls for gay delights!
  The crimson flower of battle blooms,
    And solemn marches fill the night.

  Weave but the flag whose bars to-day
    Drooped heavy o'er our early dead,
  And homely garments, coarse and gray,
    For orphans that must earn their bread!

  Keep back your tunes, ye viols sweet,
    That poured delight from other lands!
  Rouse there the dancer's restless feet:
    The trumpet leads our warrior bands.

  And ye that wage the war of words
    With mystic fame and subtle power,
  Go, chatter to the idle birds,
    Or teach the lesson of the hour!

  Ye Sibyl Arts, in one stern knot
    Be all your offices combined!
  Stand close, while Courage draws the lot,
    The destiny of human kind.

  And if that destiny could fail,
    The sun should darken in the sky,
  The eternal bloom of Nature pale,
    And God, and Truth, and Freedom die!

JULIA WARD HOWE.

       *       *       *       *       *




WHEN THIS CRUEL WAR IS OVER.


  Dearest love, do you remember
    When we last did meet,
  How you told me that you loved me
    Kneeling at my feet?
  Oh, how proud you stood before me
    In your suit of blue,
  When you vowed to me and country
    Ever to be true.

  _Chorus.--Weeping, sad and lonely,
              Hopes and fears, how vain;
              Yet praying
              When this cruel war is over.
              Praying that we meet again._

  When the summer breeze is sighing
    Mournfully along,
  Or when autumn leaves are falling,
    Sadly breathes the song.
  Oft in dreams I see thee lying
    On the battle plain,
  Lonely, wounded, even dying,
    Calling, but in vain.
  _Chorus.--Weeping, sad,_ etc.

  If, amid the din of battle,
    Nobly you should fall,
  Far away from those who love you,
    None to hear you call,
  Who would whisper words of comfort?
    Who would soothe your pain?
  Ah, the many cruel fancies
    Ever in my brain!
  _Chorus.--Weeping, sad,_ etc.

  But our country called you, darling,
    Angels cheer your way!
  While our nation's sons are fighting,
    We can only pray.
  Nobly strike for God and country,
    Let all nations see
  How we love the starry banner,
    Emblem of the free.

  _Chorus.--Weeping, sad and lonely,
              Hopes and fears, how vain;
              Yet praying
              When this cruel war is over,
              Praying that we meet again._

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




SHERIDAN'S RIDE.

[September 19, 1864.]


  Up from the South at break of day,
  Bringing to Winchester fresh dismay,
  The affrighted air with a shudder bore,
  Like a herald in haste, to the chieftain's door,
  The terrible grumble and rumble and roar,
  Telling the battle was on once more,
  And Sheridan twenty miles away.

  And wider still those billows of war
  Thundered along the horizon's bar;
  And louder yet into Winchester rolled
  The roar of that red sea uncontrolled,
  Making the blood of the listener cold
  As he thought of the stake in that fiery fray,
  With Sheridan twenty miles away.

  But there is a road from Winchester town,
  A good, broad highway, leading down;
  And there, through the flash of the morning light,
  A steed as black as the steeds of night
  Was seen to pass as with eagle flight.
  As if he knew the terrible need,
  He stretched away with the utmost speed;
  Hills rose and fell,--but his heart was gay,
  With Sheridan fifteen miles away.

  Still sprung from those swift hoofs, thundering South,
  The dust, like smoke from the cannon's mouth;
  Or the trail of a comet, sweeping faster and faster,
  Foreboding to traitors the doom of disaster.
  The heart of the steed and the heart of the master
  Were beating, like prisoners assaulting their walls.
  Impatient to be where the battle-field calls;
  Every nerve of the charger was strained to full play,
  With Sheridan only ten miles away.

  Under his spurning feet, the road
  Like an arrowy Alpine river flowed,
  And the landscape sped away behind,
  Like an ocean flying before the wind;
  And the steed, like a bark fed with furnace ire,
  Swept on, with his wild eyes full of fire;
  But, lo! he is nearing his heart's desire,
  He is snuffing the smoke of the roaring fray,
  With Sheridan only five miles away.

  The first that the General saw were the groups
  Of stragglers, and then the retreating troops;
  What was done,--what to do,--a glance told him both,
  And, striking his spurs with a terrible oath,
  He dashed down the line mid a storm of huzzas,
  And the wave of retreat checked its course there, because
  The sight of the master compelled it to pause.
  With foam and with dust the black charger was gray;
  By the flash of his eye, and his nostril's play,
  He seemed to the whole great army to say,
  "I have brought you Sheridan all the way
  From Winchester down, to save the day!"

  Hurrah, hurrah for Sheridan!
  Hurrah, hurrah, for horse and man!
  And when their statues are placed on high,
  Under the dome of the Union sky,--
  The American soldier's Temple of Fame,--
  There with the glorious General's name
  Be it said in letters both bold and bright:
  "Here is the steed that saved the day
  By carrying Sheridan into the fight,
  From Winchester,--twenty miles away!"

THOMAS BUCHANAN READ.

       *       *       *       *       *




LEFT ON THE BATTLE-FIELD.


  What, was it a dream? am I all alone
    In the dreary night and the drizzling rain?
  Hist!--ah, it was only the river's moan;
    They have left me behind with the mangled slain.

  Yes, now I remember it all too well!
    We met, from the battling ranks apart;
  Together our weapons Hashed and fell,
    And mine was sheathed in his quivering heart.

  In the cypress gloom, where the deed was done,
    It was all too dark to see his face;
  But I heard his death-groans, one by one,
    And he holds me still in a cold embrace.

  He spoke but once, and I could not hear
    The words he said for the cannon's roar;
  But my heart grew cold with a deadly fear,--
    God! I had heard that voice before!

  Had heard it before at our mother's knee,
    When we lisped the words of our evening prayer!
  My brother! would I had died for thee,--
    This burden is more than my soul can bear!

  I pressed my lips to his death-cold cheek,
    And begged him to show me, by word or sign,
  That he knew and forgave me: he could not speak,
    But he nestled his poor cold face to mine.

  The blood flowed fast from my wounded side,
    And then for a while I forgot my pain,
  And over the lakelet we seemed to glide
    In our little boat, two boys again.

  And then, in my dream, we stood alone
    On a forest path where the shadows fell;
  And I heard again the tremulous tone,
    And the tender words of his last farewell.

  But that parting was years, long years ago,
    He wandered away to a foreign land;
  And our dear old mother will never know
    That he died to-night by his brother's hand.

  The soldiers who buried the dead away
    Disturbed not the clasp of that last embrace,
  But laid them to sleep till the judgment-day,
    Heart folded to heart, and face to face.

SARAH TITTLE BOLTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




REQUIEM

FOR ONE SLAIN IN BATTLE.


  Breathe, trumpets, breathe
    Slow notes of saddest wailing,--
  Sadly responsive peal, ye muffled drums;
  Comrades, with downcast eyes
      And banners trailing,
      Attend him home,--
  The youthful warrior comes.

  Upon his shield,
    Upon his shield returning,
  Borne from the field of honor
    Where he fell;
  Glory and grief, together clasped
    In mourning,
  His fame, his fate
    With sobs exulting tell.

  Wrap round his breast
    The flag his breast defended,--
  His country's flag,
    In battle's front unrolled:
  For it he died;
    On earth forever ended
  His brave young life
    Lives in each sacred fold.
  With proud fond tears,
    By tinge of shame untainted,
  Bear him, and lay him
    Gently in his grave:

  Above the hero write,--
    The young, half-sainted,--
  His country asked his life,
    His life he gave!

GEORGE LUNT.

       *       *       *       *       *




MUSIC IN CAMP.


  Two armies covered hill and plain,
    Where Rappahannock's waters
  Ran deeply crimsoned with the stain
    Of battle's recent slaughters.

  The summer clouds lay pitched like tents
    In meads of heavenly azure;
  And each dread gun of the elements
    Slept in its embrasure.

  The breeze so softly blew, it made
    No forest leaf to quiver,
  And the smoke of the random cannonade
    Rolled slowly from the river.

  And now, where circling hills looked down
    With cannon grimly planted,
  O'er listless camp and silent town
    The golden sunset slanted.

  When on the fervid air there came
    A strain--now rich, now tender;
  The music seemed itself aflame
    With day's departing splendor.

  A Federal band, which, eve and morn,
    Played measures brave and nimble,
  Had just struck up, with flute and horn
    And lively clash of cymbal.

  Down flocked the soldiers to the banks,
    Till, margined by its pebbles,
  One wooded shore was blue with "Yanks,"
    And one was gray with "Rebels."

  Then all was still, and then the band,
    With movements light and tricksy,
  Made stream and forest, hill and strand,
    Reverberate with "Dixie."

  The conscious stream with burnished glow
    Went proudly o'er its pebbles,
  But thrilled throughout its deepest flow
    With yelling of the Rebels.

  Again a pause, and then again
    The trumpets pealed sonorous,
  And "Yankee Doodle" was the strain
    To which the shore gave chorus.

  The laughing ripple shoreward flew,
    To kiss the shining pebbles;
  Loud shrieked the swarming Boys in Blue
    Defiance to the Rebels.

  And yet once more the bugle sang
    Above the stormy riot;
  No shout upon the evening rang--
    There reigned a holy quiet.

  The sad, slow stream its noiseless flood
    Poured o'er the glistening pebbles;
  All silent now the Yankees stood,
    And silent stood the Rebels.

  No unresponsive soul had heard
    That plaintive note's appealing,
  So deeply "Home, Sweet Home" had stirred
    The hidden fount of feeling.

  Or Blue, or Gray, the soldier sees,
    As by the wand of fairy,
  The cottage 'neath the live-oak trees,
    The cabin by the prairie.

  Or cold, or warm, his native skies,
    Bend in their beauty o'er him;
  Seen through the tear-mist in his eyes,
    His loved ones stand before him.

  As fades the iris after rain
    In April's tearful weather,
  The vision vanished, as the strain
    And daylight died together.

  But memory, waked by music's art,
    Expressed in simplest numbers,
  Subdued the sternest Yankee's heart,
    Made light the Rebel's slumbers.

  And fair the form of Music shines,
    That bright celestial creature.
  Who still, 'mid war's embattled lines,
    Gave this one touch of Nature.

JOHN RANDOLPH THOMPSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




UNDER THE SHADE OF THE TREES.

[The last words of Stonewall Jackson[A] were: "Let us cross the river
and rest under the shade of the trees."]

[Footnote A: Major-General Thomas J. Jackson, C.S.A., killed on a
reconnoissance, May 10, 1863.]


  What are the thoughts that are stirring his breast?
    What is the mystical vision he sees?
  --"Let us pass over the river, and rest
    Under the shade of the trees."

  Has he grown sick of his toils and his tasks?
    Sighs the worn spirit for respite or ease?
  Is it a moment's cool halt that he asks
    Under the shade of the trees?

  Is it the gurgle of water whose flow
    Ofttimes has come to him, borne on the breeze,
  Memory listens to, lapsing so low,
    Under the shade of the trees?

  Nay--though the rasp of the flesh was so sore,
    Faith, that had yearnings far keener than these,
  Saw the soft sheen of the Thitherward Shore
    Under the shade of the trees;--

  Caught the high psalm of ecstatic delight--
    Heard the harps harping, like soundings of seas--
  Watched earth's assoiled ones walking in white
    Under the shade of the trees.

  Oh, was it strange he should pine for release,
    Touched to the soul with such transports as these,--
  He who so needed the balsam of peace,
    Under the shade of the trees?

  Yea, it was noblest for him--it was best
    (Questioning naught of our Father's decrees),
  There to pass over the river and rest
    Under the shade of the trees!

MARGARET JUNKIN PRESTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BLACK REGIMENT.

[May 27, 1863.]


  Dark as the clouds of even,
  Banked in the western heaven,
  Waiting the breath that lifts
  All the dead mass, and drifts
  Tempest and falling brand
  Over a ruined land,--
  So still and orderly,
  Arm to arm, knee to knee,
  Waiting the great event,
  Stands the black regiment.

  Down the long dusty line
  Teeth gleam and eyeballs shine;
  And the bright bayonet,
  Bristling and firmly set,
  Flashed with a purpose grand,
  Long ere the sharp command
  Of the fierce rolling drum
  Told them their time had come,
  Told them what work was sent
  For the black regiment.

  "Now," the flag-sergeant cried,
  "Though death and hell betide,
  Let the whole nation see
  If we are fit to be
  Free in this land; or bound
  Down, like the whining hound,--
  Bound with red stripes of pain
  In our cold chains again!"
  O, what a shout there went
  From the black regiment!

  "Charge!" Trump and drum awoke;
  Onward the bondmen broke;
  Bayonet and sabre-stroke
  Vainly opposed their rush.
  Through the wild battle's crush,
  With but one thought aflush,
  Driving their lords like chaff,
  In the guns' mouths they laugh;
  Or at the slippery brands
  Leaping with open hands,
  Down they tear man and horse,
  Down in their awful course;
  Trampling with bloody heel
  Over the crashing steel,--
  All their eyes forward bent,
  Rushed the black regiment.

  "Freedom!" their battle-cry,--
  "Freedom! or leave to die!"
  Ah! and they meant the word,
  Not as with us 'tis heard,
  Not a mere party shout;
  They gave their spirits out,
  Trusted the end to God,
  And on the gory sod
  Rolled in triumphant blood.
  Glad to strike one free blow,
  Whether for weal or woe;
  Glad to breathe one free breath,
  Though on the lips of death;
  Praying,--alas! in vain!--That
  they might fall again,
  So they could once more see
  That burst to liberty!
  This was what "freedom" lent
  To the black regiment.

  Hundreds on hundreds fell;
  But they are resting well;
  Scourges and shackles strong
  Never shall do them wrong.
  O, to the living few,
  Soldiers, be just and true!
  Hail them as comrades tried;
  Fight with them side by side;
  Never, in field or tent,
  Scorn the black regiment!

GEORGE HENRY BOKER.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE C.S. ARMY'S COMMISSARY.

  I.--1863.

  "Well, this is bad!" we sighing said,
    While musing round the bivouac fire,
    And dwelling with a fond desire,
  On home and comforts long since fled.

  "How gayly came we forth at first!
    Our spirits high, with new emprise,
    Ambitious of each exercise,
  And glowing with a martial thirst.

  "Equipped as for a holiday,
    With bounteous store of everything
    To use or comfort minist'ring,
  All cheerily we marched away.

  "But as the struggle fiercer grew,
    Light marching orders came apace,--
    And baggage-wagon soon gave place
  To that which sterner uses knew.

  "Our tents--they went a year ago;
    Now kettle, spider, frying-pan
    Are lost to us, and as we can
  We live, while marching to and fro.

  "Our food has lessened, till at length,
    E'en want's gaunt image seems to threat--
    A foe to whom the bravest yet
  Must yield at last his knightly strength.

  "But while we've meat and flour enough
    The bayonet shall be our spit--
    The ramrod bake our dough on it--
  A gum-cloth be our kneading trough.

  "We'll bear privation, danger dare,
    While even these are left to us--
    Be hopeful, faithful, emulous
  Of gallant deeds, though hard our fare!"


  II.--1864.

  "Three years and more," we grimly said,
    When order came to "Rest at will"
    Beside the corn-field on the hill,
  As on a weary march we sped--

  "Three years and more we've met the foe
    On many a gory, hard-fought field,
    And still we swear we cannot yield
  Till Fate shall bring some deeper woe.

  "Three years and more we've struggled on,
    Through torrid heat and winter's chill,
    Nor bated aught of steadfast will,
  Though even hope seems almost gone.

  "Ill fed, ill clad, and shelterless,
    How little cheer in health we know!
    When wounds and illness lay us low,
  How comfortless our sore distress!

  "These flimsy rags, that scarcely hide
    Our forms, can naught discourage us;
    But Hunger--ah! it may be thus
  That Fortune shall the strife decide.

  "But while the corn-fields give supply
    We'll take, content, the roasting-ear,
    Nor yield us yet to craven fear,
  But still press on, to do or die:"

ED. PORTER THOMPSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE HIGH TIDE AT GETTYSBURG.

[July 3, 1863.]


  A cloud possessed the hollow field.
  The gathering battle's smoky shield.
  Athwart the gloom the lightning flashed,
  And through the cloud some horsemen dashed,
  And from the heights the thunder pealed.

  Then at the brief command of Lee
  Moved out that matchless infantry,
  With Pickett leading grandly down,
  To rush against the roaring crown
  Of those dread heights of destiny.

  Far heard above the angry guns
  A cry across the tumult runs,--
  The voice that rang through Shiloh's woods
  And Chickamanga's solitudes,
  The fierce South cheering on her sons!

  Ah, how the withering tempest blew
  Against the front of Pettigrew!
  A Khamsin wind that scorched and singed
  Like that infernal flame that fringed
  The British squares at Waterloo!

  A thousand fell where Kemper led;
  A thousand died where Garnett bled:
  In blinding flame and strangling smoke
  The remnant through the batteries broke
  And crossed the works with Armistead.

  "Once more in Glory's van with me!"
  Virginia cried to Tennessee;
  "We two together, come what may,
  Shall stand upon these works to-day!"
  (The reddest day in history.)

  Brave Tennessee! In reckless way
  Virginia heard her comrade say:
  "Close round this rent and riddled rag!"
  What time she set her battle-flag
  Amid the guns of Doubleday.

  But who shall break the guards that wait
  Before the awful face of Fate?
  The tattered standards of the South
  Were shrivelled at the cannon's mouth,
  And all her hopes were desolate.

  In vain the Tennesseean set
  His breast against the bayonet!
  In vain Virginia charged and raged,
  A tigress in her wrath uncaged,
  Till all the hill was red and wet!

  Above the bayonets, mixed and crossed,
  Men saw a gray, gigantic ghost
  Receding through the battle-cloud,
  And heard across the tempest loud
  The death-cry of a nation lost!

  The brave went down! Without disgrace
  They leaped to Ruin's red embrace.
  They only heard Fame's thunders wake,
  And saw the dazzling sun-burst break
  In smiles on Glory's bloody face!

  They fell, who lifted up a hand
  And bade the sun in heaven to stand!
  They smote and fell, who set the bars
  Against the progress of the stars,
  And stayed the march of Motherland!

  They stood, who saw the future come
  On through the fight's delirium!
  They smote and stood, who held the hope
  Of nations on that slippery slope
  Amid the cheers of Christendom.

  God lives! He forged the iron will
    That clutched and held that trembling hill.
  God lives and reigns! He built and lent
  The heights for Freedom's battlement
  Where floats her flag in triumph still!

  Fold up the banners! Smelt the guns!
  Love rules. Her gentler purpose runs.
  A mighty mother turns in tears
  The pages of her battle years,
  Lamenting all her fallen sons!

WILL HENRY THOMPSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




LEE TO THE REAR.

[An incident in one of the battles in the Wilderness at the beginning
of the campaign of 1864.]


  Dawn of a pleasant morning in May
  Broke through the Wilderness cool and gray;
  While perched in the tallest tree-tops, the birds
  Were carolling Mendelssohn's "Songs without Words."

  Far from the haunts of men remote,
  The brook brawled on with a liquid note;
  And Nature, all tranquil and lovely, wore
  The smile of the spring, as in Eden of yore.

  Little by little, as daylight increased,
  And deepened the roseate flush in the East--
  Little by little did morning reveal
  Two long glittering lines of steel;

  Where two hundred thousand bayonets gleam,
  Tipped with the light of the earliest beam,
  And the faces are sullen and grim to see
  In the hostile armies of Grant and Lee.

  All of a sudden, ere rose the sun,
  Pealed on the silence the opening gun--
  A little white puff of smoke there came,
  And anon the valley was wreathed in flame.

  Down on the left of the Rebel lines,
  Where a breastwork stands in a copse of pines,
  Before the Rebels their ranks can form,
  The Yankees have carried the place by storm.

  Stars and Stripes on the salient wave,
  Where many a hero has found a grave,
  And the gallant Confederates strive in vain
  The ground they have drenched with their blood, to regain.

  Yet louder the thunder of battle roared--
  Yet a deadlier fire on the columns poured;
  Slaughter infernal rode with Despair,
  Furies twain, through the murky air.

  Not far off, in the saddle there sat
  A gray-bearded man in a black slouched hat;
  Not much moved by the fire was he,
  Calm and resolute Robert Lee.

  Quick and watchful he kept his eye
  On the bold Rebel brigades close by,--
  Reserves that were standing (and dying) at ease,
  While the tempest of wrath toppled over the trees.

  For still with their loud, deep, bull-dog bay,
  The Yankee batteries blazed away,
  And with every murderous second that sped
  A dozen brave fellows, alas! fell dead.

  The grand old graybeard rode to the space
  Where Death and his victims stood face to face,
  And silently waved his old slouched hat--
  A world of meaning there was in that!

  "Follow me! Steady! We'll save the day!"
  This was what he seemed to say;
  And to the light of his glorious eye
  The bold brigades thus made reply:

  "We'll go forward, but you must go back "--
  And they moved not an inch in the perilous track:
  "Go to the rear, and we'll send them to hell!"
  And the sound of the battle was lost in their yell.

  Turning his bridle, Robert Lee
  Rode to the rear. Like waves of the sea,
  Bursting the dikes in their overflow,
  Madly his veterans dashed on the foe.

  And backward in terror that foe was driven,
  Their banners rent and their columns riven,
  Wherever the tide of battle rolled
  Over the Wilderness, wood and wold.

  Sunset out of a crimson sky
  Streamed o'er a field of ruddier dye,
  And the brook ran on with a purple stain,
  From the blood of ten thousand foemen slain.

  Seasons have passed since that day and year--
  Again o'er its pebbles the brook runs clear,
  And the field in a richer green is drest
  Where the dead of a terrible conflict rest.

  Hushed is the roll of the Rebel drum,
  The sabres are sheathed, and the cannon are dumb;
  And Fate, with his pitiless hand, has furled
  The flag that once challenged the gaze of the world;

  But the fame of the Wilderness fight abides;
  And down into history grandly rides,
  Calm and unmoved as in battle he sat,
  The gray-bearded man in the black slouched hat.

JOHN RANDOLPH THOMPSON.

       *       *       *       *       *




DRIVING HOME THE COWS.


  Out of the clover and blue-eyed grass
    He turned them into the river-lane;
  One after another he let them pass,
    Then fastened the meadow bars again.

  Under the willows, and over the hill,
    He patiently followed their sober pace;
  The merry whistle for once was still,
    And something shadowed the sunny face.

  Only a boy! and his father had said
    He never could let his youngest go;
  Two already were lying dead
    Under the feet of the trampling foe.

  But after the evening work was done,
    And the frogs were loud in the meadow-swamp,
  Over his shoulder he slung his gun
    And stealthily followed the foot-path damp,

  Across the clover and through the wheat
    With resolute heart and purpose grim,
  Though cold was the dew on his hurrying feet,
    And the blind bat's flitting startled him.

  Thrice since then had the lanes been white,
    And the orchards sweet with apple-bloom;
  And now, when the cows came back at night,
    The feeble father drove them home.

  For news had come to the lonely farm
    That three were lying where two had lain;
  And the old man's tremulous, palsied arm
    Could never lean on a son's again.

  The summer day grew cool and late,
    He went for the cows when the work was done;
  But down the lane, as he opened the gate,
    He saw them coming one by one,--

  Brindle, Ebony, Speckle, and Bess,
    Shaking their horns in the evening wind;
  Cropping the buttercups out of the grass,--
  But who was it following close behind?

  Loosely swung in the idle air
    The empty sleeve of army blue;
  And worn and pale, from the crisping hair,
    Looked out a face that the father knew.

  For gloomy prisons will sometimes yawn,
    And yield their dead unto life again;
  And the day that comes with a cloudy dawn
    In golden glory at last may wane.

  The great tears sprang to their meeting eyes;
    For the heart must speak when the lips are dumb;
  And under the silent evening skies
    Together they followed the cattle home.

KATE PUTNAM OSGOOD.

       *       *       *       *       *




SHERMAN'S MARCH TO THE SEA.[A]

[Footnote A: This song was sung by thousands of Sherman's soldiers
after the march, and had the honor of giving its name to the campaign
it celebrates. Its author had been one of Sherman's army, and was
captured at the battle of Chattanooga. While a prisoner he escaped,
disguised himself in a Confederate uniform, went to the Southern army,
and witnessed some of the fierce fighting about Atlanta. He was
discovered and sent back to prison at Columbia, S.C., where he wrote
the song. He soon escaped again, rejoined Sherman's army, and for a
time served on General Sherman's staff. From Cape Fear River he was
sent North with despatches to Grant and President Lincoln, bringing
the first news of Sherman's successes in the Carolinas.]

[May 4 to December 21, 1864.]


  Our camp-fires shone bright on the mountains
    That frowned on the river below,
  While we stood by our guns in the morning
    And eagerly watched for the foe,
  When a rider came out of the darkness
    That hung over the mountain and tree,
  And shouted, "Boys, up and be ready!
    For Sherman will march to the sea."

  Then cheer upon cheer for bold Sherman
    Went up from each valley and glen,
  And the bugles re-echoed the music
    That came from the lips of the men;
  For we knew that the stars in our banner
    More bright in their splendor would be,
  And that blessings from Northland would greet us
    When Sherman marched down to the sea.

  Then forward, boys, forward to battle,
    We marched on our wearisome way,
  We stormed the wild hills of Resaca;
    God bless those who fell on that day!
  Then Kenesaw, dark in its glory,
    Frowned down on the flag of the free,
  But the East and the West bore our standards,
    And Sherman marched on to the sea.

  Still onward we pressed, till our banners
    Swept out from Atlanta's grim walls,
  And the blood of the patriot dampened
    The soil where the traitor flag falls;
  Yet we paused not to weep for the fallen,
    Who slept by each river and tree;
  We twined them a wreath of the laurel
    As Sherman marched down to the sea.

  Oh! proud was our army that morning,
    That stood where the pine darkly towers,
  When Sherman said: "Boys, you are weary;
    This day fair Savannah is ours!"
  Then sang we a song for our chieftain,
    That echoed o'er river and lea,
  And the stars in our banner shone brighter
    When Sherman marched down to the sea.

SAMUEL H.M. BYERS.

       *       *       *       *       *




ARMY CORRESPONDENT'S LAST RIDE.

FIVE FORKS, APRIL 1, 1865.


  Ho! pony. Down the lonely road
    Strike now your cheeriest pace!
  The woods on fire do not burn higher
    Than burns my anxious face;
  Far have you sped, but all this night
    Must feel my nervous spur;
  If we be late, the world must wait
    The tidings we aver:--
  To home and hamlet, town and hearth,
    To thrill child, mother, man,
  I carry to the waiting North
    Great news from Sheridan!

  The birds are dead among the pines,
    Slain by the battle fright,
  Prone in the road the steed reclines
    That never readied the fight;
  Yet on we go,--the wreck below
    Of many a tumbled wain,--
  By ghastly pools where stranded mules
    Die, drinking of the rain;
  With but my list of killed and missed
    I spur my stumbling nag,
  To tell of death at many a tryst,
    But victory to the flag!

  "Halt! who comes there? The countersign!"--
    "A friend."--"Advance! The fight,--
  How goes it, say?"--"We won the day!"--
    "Huzza! Pass on!"--"Good-night!"--
  And parts the darkness on before,
    And down the mire we tramp,
  And the black sky is painted o'er
    With many a pulsing camp;
  O'er stumps and ruts, by ruined huts,
    Where ghosts look through the gloam,--
  Behind my tread I hear the dead
    Follow the news toward home!

  The hunted souls I see behind,
    In swamp and in ravine,
  Whose cry for mercy thrills the wind
    Till cracks the sure carbine;
  The moving lights, which scare the dark,
    And show the trampled place
  Where, in his blood, some mother's bud
    Turns up his young, dead face;
  The captives spent, whose standards rent
    The conqueror parades,
  As at the Five Forks roads arrive
    The General's dashing aides.

  O wondrous Youth! through this grand ruth
    Runs my boy's life its thread;
  The General's fame, the battle's name,
    The rolls of maimed and dead
  I bear, with my thrilled soul astir,
    And lonely thoughts and fears;
  And am but History's courier
    To bind the conquering years;
  A battle-ray, through ages gray
    To light to deeds sublime,
  And flash the lustre of this day
   Down all the aisles of Time!

  Ho! pony,--'tis the signal gun
    The night-assault decreed;
  On Petersburg the thunderbolts
    Crash from the lines of Meade;
  Fade the pale, frightened stars o'erhead,
    And shrieks the bursting air;
  The forest foliage, tinted red,
    Grows ghastlier in the glare;
  Though in her towers, reached her last hours,
    Rocks proud Rebellion's crest--
  The world may sag, if but my nag
    Get in before the rest!

  With bloody flank, and fetlocks dank,
    And goad, and lash, and shout--
  Great God! as every hoof-beat falls
    A hundred lives beat out!
  As weary as this broken steed
    Reels down the corduroys,
  So, weary, fight for morning light
    Our hot and grimy boys;
  Through ditches wet, o'er parapet
    And guns barbette, they catch
  The last, lost breach; and I,--I reach
    The mail with my despatch!

  Sure it shall speed, the land to read,
    As sped the happiest shell!
  The shot I send strike the world's end;
    _This_ tells my pony's knell;
  His long race run, the long war done,
    My occupation gone,--
  Above his bier, prone on the pier,
    The vultures fleck the dawn.
  Still, rest his bones where soldiers dwell,
    Till the Long Roll they catch.
  He fell the day that Richmond fell,
    And took the first despatch!

GEORGE ALFRED TOWNSEND.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE YEAR OF JUBILEE.[A]

[Footnote A: Sung by negro troops when entering Richmond. George Gary
Eggleston, in his collection of "American War Ballads," says that it
soon found favor among the people and "was sung with applause by young
men and maidens in well-nigh every house in Virginia."]


  Say, darkeys, hab you seen de massa,
    Wid de muffstash on he face,
  Go long de road some time dis mornin',
    Like he gwine leabe de place?
  He see de smoke way up de ribber
    Whar de Lincum gunboats lay;
  He took he hat an' leff berry sudden,
    And I spose he's runned away.

      De massa run, ha, ha!
      De darkey stay, ho, ho!
      It mus' be now de kingdum comin',
      An' de yar ob jubilo.

  He six foot one way an' two foot todder,
    An' he weigh six hundred poun';
  His coat so big he couldn't pay de tailor,
    An' it won't reach half way roun';
  He drill so much dey calls him cap'n,
    An he git so mighty tanned,
  I spec he'll try to fool dem Yankees,
    For to tink he contraband,
      De massa run, ha, ha!
      De darkey stay, ho, ho!
      It mus' be now de kingdum comin',
      An' de yar ob jubilo.

  De darkeys got so lonesome libb'n
    In de log hut on de lawn,
  Dey moved dere tings into massa's parlor
    For to keep it while he gone.
  Dar's wine an' cider in de kitchin,
    An' de darkeys dey hab some,
  I spec it will be all fiscated,
    When de Lincum sojers come.
      De massa run, ha, ha!
      De darkey stay, ho, ho!
     It mus' be now de kingdum comin',
     An' de yar ob jubilo.

  De oberseer he makes us trubble,
    An' he dribe us roun' a spell,
  We lock him up in de smoke-house cellar,
    Wid de key flung in de well.
  De whip am lost, de han'-cuff broke,
    But de massy hab his pay;
  He big an' ole enough for to know better
    Dan to went an' run away.
      De massa run, ha, ha!
      De darkey stay, ho, ho!
      It mus' be now de kingdum comin',
      An' de yar ob jubilo.

ANONYMOUS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CONQUERED BANNER.


  Furl that Banner, for 'tis weary;
  Round its staff 'tis drooping dreary:
    Furl it, fold it,--it is best;
  For there's not a man to wave it,
  And there's not a sword to save it,
  And there's not one left to lave it
  In the blood which heroes gave it,
  And its foes now scorn and brave it:
    Furl it, hide it,--let it rest!

  Take that Banner down! 'tis tattered;
  Broken is its staff and shattered;
  And the valiant hosts are scattered,
    Over whom it floated high.
  Oh, 'tis hard for us to fold it,
  Hard to think there's none to hold it,
  Hard that those who once unrolled it
    Now must furl it with a sigh!

  Furl that Banner--furl it sadly!
  Once ten thousands hailed it gladly,
  And ten thousands wildly, madly,
    Swore it should forever wave;
  Swore that foeman's sword should never
  Hearts like theirs entwined dissever,
  Till that flag should float forever
    O'er their freedom or their grave!

  Furl it! for the hands that grasped it,
  And the hearts that fondly clasped it,
    Cold and dead are lying low;
  And that Banner--it is trailing,
  While around it sounds the wailing
    Of its people in their woe.

  For, though conquered, they adore it,--
  Love the cold, dead hands that bore it,
  Weep for those who fell before it,
  Pardon those who trailed and tore it;
  And oh, wildly they deplore it,
    Now to furl and fold it so!

  Furl that Banner! True, 'tis gory,
  Yet 'tis wreathed around with glory,
  And 't will live in song and story
    Though its folds are in the dust!
  For its fame on brightest pages,
  Penned by poets and by sages,
  Shall go sounding down the ages--
    Furl its folds though now we must.

  Furl that Banner, softly, slowly!
  Treat it gently--it is holy,
    For it droops above the dead.
  Touch it not--unfold it never;
  Let it droop there, furled forever,--
      For its people's hopes are fled!

ABRAM JOSEPH RYAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




ALL.


  There hangs a sabre, and there a rein,
  With a rusty buckle and green curb chain;
  A pair of spurs on the old gray wall,
  And a mouldy saddle--well, that is all.

  Come out to the stable--it is not far;
  The moss grown door is hanging ajar.
  Look within! There's an empty stall,
  Where once stood a charger, and that is all.

  The good black horse came riderless home,
  Flecked with blood drops as well as foam;
  See yonder hillock where dead leaves fall;
  The good black horse pined to death--that's all.

  All? O, God! it is all I can speak.
  Question me not--I am old and weak;
  His sabre and his saddle hang on the wall,
  And his horse pined to death--I have told you all.

FRANCIS ALEXANDER DURIVAGE.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CLOSING SCENE.


  Within the sober realm of leafless trees,
    The russet year inhaled the dreamy air;
  Like some tanned reaper, in his hour of ease,
    When all the fields are lying brown and bare.

  The gray barns looking from their hazy hills,
    O'er the dun waters widening in the vales,
  Sent down the air a greeting to the mills
    On the dull thunder of alternate flails.

  All sights were mellowed and all sounds subdued,
    The hills seemed further and the stream sang low,
  As in a dream the distant woodman hewed
    His winter log with many a muffled blow.

  The embattled forests, erewhile armed with gold,
    Their banners bright with every martial hue,
  Now stood like some sad, beaten host of old,
    Withdrawn afar in Time's remotest blue.

  On slumb'rous wings the vulture held his flight;
    The dove scarce heard its sighing mate's complaint;
  And, like a star slow drowning in the light,
    The village church-vane seemed to pale and faint.

  The sentinel-cock upon the hillside crew,--
    Crew thrice,--and all was stiller than before;
  Silent, till some replying warden blew
    His alien horn, and then was heard no more.

  Where erst the jay, within the elm's tall crest,
    Made garrulous trouble round her unfledged young;
  And where the oriole hung her swaying nest,
    By every light wind like a censer swung;--

  Where sang the noisy martens of the eaves,
    The busy swallows circling ever near,--
  Foreboding, as the rustic mind believes,
    An early harvest and a plenteous year;--

  Where every bird which charmed the vernal feast
    Shook the sweet slumber from its wings at morn,
  To warn the reaper of the rosy east:--
    All now was sunless, empty, and forlorn.

  Alone from out the stubble piped the quail,
    And croaked the crow through all the dreamy gloom;
  Alone the pheasant, drumming in the vale,
    Made echo to the distant cottage-loom.

  There was no bud, no bloom upon the bowers;
    The spiders moved their thin shrouds night by night,
  The thistle-down, the only ghost of flowers,
    Sailed slowly by,--passed noiseless out of sight.

  Amid all this--in this most cheerless air,
    And where the woodbine shed upon the porch
  Its crimson leaves, as if the Year stood there
    Firing the floor with his inverted torch,--

  Amid all this, the centre of the scene,
    The white-haired matron with monotonous tread
  Plied the swift wheel, and with her joyless mien
    Sat, like a fate, and watched the flying thread,

  She had known Sorrow,--he had walked with her,
    Oft supped, and broke the bitter ashen crust;
  And in the dead leaves still she heard the stir
    Of his black mantle trailing in the dust.

  While yet her cheek was bright with summer bloom,
    Her country summoned and she gave her all;
  And twice War bowed to her his sable plume,--
    Re-gave the swords to rust upon the wall.

  Re-gave the swords, but not the hand that drew
    And struck for Liberty the dying blow;
  Nor him who, to his sire and country true,
    Fell mid the ranks of the invading foe.

  Long, but not loud, the droning wheel went on,
    Like the low murmur of a hive at noon;
  Long, but not loud, the memory of the gone
    Breathed through her lips a sad and tremulous tune.

  At last the thread was snapped; her head was bowed;
    Life dropt the distaff through his hands serene;
  And loving neighbors smoothed her careful shroud,
    While Death and Winter closed the autumn scene.

THOMAS BUCHANAN READ.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE MEN BEHIND THE GUNS.

[The Spanish-American War, 1898.]


  A cheer and salute for the Admiral, and here's to the Captain bold,
  And never forget the Commodore's debt when the deeds of might are
          told!
  They stand to the deck through the battle's wreck when the great
          shells roar and screech--
  And never they fear when the foe is near to practise what they
          preach:
  But off with your hat and three times three for Columbia's true-blue
          sons,
  The men below who batter the foe--the men behind the guns!

  Oh, light and merry of heart are they when they swing into port once
          more,
  When, with more than enough of the "green-backed stuff," they start
          for their leave-o'-shore;
  And you'd think, perhaps, that the blue-bloused chaps who loll along
          the street
  Are a tender bit, with salt on it, for some fierce "mustache" to
          eat--
  Some warrior bold, with straps of gold, who dazzles and fairly stuns
  The modest worth of the sailor boys--the lads who serve the guns.

  But say not a word till the shot is heard that tells the fight is
          on.
  Till the long, deep roar grows more and more from the ships of
          "Yank" and "Don,"
  Till over the deep the tempests sweep of fire and bursting shell,
  And the very air is a mad Despair in the throes of a living hell;
  Then down, deep down, in the mighty ship, unseen by the midday suns,
  You'll find the chaps who are giving the raps--the men behind the
          guns!

  Oh, well they know how the cyclones blow that they loose from their
          cloud of death,
  And they know is heard the thunder-word their fierce ten-incher
          saith!
  The steel decks rock with the lightning shock, and shake with the
          great recoil,
  And the sea grows red with the blood of the dead and reaches for his
          spoil--
  But not till the foe has gone below or turns his prow and runs,
  Shall the voice of peace bring sweet release to the men behind the
          guns!

JOHN JEROME ROONEY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BATTLE OF MANILA.
A FRAGMENT.

[May I, 1898.]


  By Cavite on the bay
  'Twas the Spanish squadron lay;
  And the red dawn was creeping
  O'er the city that lay sleeping
  To the east, like a bride, in the May.
  There was peace at Manila,
  In the May morn at Manila,--
  When ho, the Spanish admiral
  Awoke to find our line
  Had passed by gray Corregidor,
  Had laughed at shoal and mine,
  And flung to the sky its banners
  With "Remember" for the sign!

  With the ships of Spain before
  In the shelter of the shore,
  And the forts on the right,
  They drew forward to the fight,
  And the first was the gallant Commodore;
  In the bay of Manila,
  In the doomed bay of Manila--
  With succor half the world away,
  No port beneath that sky,
  With nothing but their ships and guns
  And Yankee pluck to try,
  They had left retreat behind them,
  They had come to win or die!

       *       *       *       *       *

  For we spoke at Manila,
  We said it at Manila,
  Oh be ye brave, or be ye strong,
  Ye build your ships in vain;
  The children of the sea queen's brood
  Will not give up the main;
  We hold the sea against the world
  As we held it against Spain.

  Be warned by Manila,
  Take warning by Manila,
  Ye may trade by land, ye may fight by land,
  Ye may hold the land in fee;
  But not go down to the sea in ships
  To battle with the free;
  For England and America
  Will keep and hold the sea!

RICHARD HOVEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

IV.

PEACE.

       *       *       *       *       *




ODE TO PEACE.


  Daughter of God! that sitt'st on high
  Amid the dances of the sky,
  And guidest with thy gentle sway
  The planets on their tuneful way;
    Sweet Peace! shall ne'er again
  The smile of thy most holy face,
  From thine ethereal dwelling-place,
  Rejoice the wretched, weary race
    Of discord-breathing men?
  Too long, O gladness-giving Queen!
  Thy tarrying in heaven has been;
  Too long o'er this fair blooming world
  The flag of blood has been unfurled,
    Polluting God's pure day;
  Whilst, as each maddening people reels,
  War onward drives his scythed wheels,
  And at his horses' bloody heels
    Shriek Murder and Dismay.

  Oft have I wept to hear the cry
  Of widow wailing bitterly;
  To see the parent's silent tear
  For children fallen beneath the spear;
    And I have felt so sore
  The sense of human guilt and woe,
  That I, in Virtue's passioned glow,
  Have cursed (my soul was wounded so)
    The shape of man I bore!
  Then come from thy serene abode,
  Thou gladness-giving child of God!
  And cease the world's ensanguined strife,
  And reconcile my soul to life;
    For much I long to see,
  Ere I shall to the grave descend,
  Thy hand its blessed branch extend,
  And to the world's remotest end
    Wave Love and Harmony!

WILLIAM TENNANT.

       *       *       *       *       *




END OF THE CIVIL WAR.

FROM KING RICHARD III., ACT I. SC. I.


  Now is the winter of our discontent
  Made glorious summer by this sun of York,
  And all the clouds that lowered upon our house
  In the deep bosom of the ocean buried.
  Now are our brows bound with victorious wreaths;
  Our bruised arms hung up for monuments;
  Our stern alarums changed to merry meetings,
  Our dreadful marches to delightful measures.
  Grim-visaged War hath smoothed his wrinkled front.
  And now, instead of mounting barbed steeds
  To fright the souls of fearful adversaries,
  He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber,
  To the lascivious pleasing of a lute.

SHAKESPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *




DISARMAMENT.


  "Put up the sword!" the voice of Christ once more
  Speaks, in the pauses of the cannon's roar,
  O'er fields of corn by fiery sickles reaped
  And left dry ashes; over trenches heaped
  With nameless dead; o'er cities starving slow
  Under a rain of fire; through wards of woe
  Down which a groaning diapason runs
  From tortured brothers, husbands, lovers, sons
  Of desolate women in their far-off homes,
  Waiting to hear the step that never comes!
  O men and brothers! let that voice be heard.
  War fails, try peace; put up the useless sword!

  Fear not the end. There is a story told
  In Eastern tents, when autumn nights grow cold,
  And round the fire the Mongol shepherds sit
  With grave responses listening unto it:
  Once on the errands of his mercy bent,
  Buddha, the holy and benevolent,
  Met a fell monster, huge and fierce of look,
  Whose awful voice the hills and forests shook.

  "O son of peace!" the giant cried, "thy fate
  Is sealed at last, and love shall yield to hate."
  The unarmed Buddha looking, with no trace
  Of fear or anger, in the monster's face,
  In pity said, "Poor fiend, even thee I love."
  Lo! as he spake the sky-tall terror sank
  To hand-breadth size; the huge abhorrence shrank
  Into the form and fashion of a dove;
  And where the thunder of its rage was heard,
  Circling above him sweetly sang the bird:
  "Hate hath no harm for love," so ran the song,
  "And peace unweaponed conquers every wrong!"

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




TUBAL CAIN.


  Old Tubal Cain was a man of might,
    In the days when earth was young;
  By the fierce red light of his furnace bright,
    The strokes of his hammer rung:
  And he lifted high his brawny hand
    On the iron glowing clear,
  Till the sparks rushed out in scarlet showers,
    As he fashioned the sword and the spear.
  And he sang: "Hurrah for my handiwork!
    Hurrah for the spear and the sword!
  Hurrah for the hand that shall wield them well,
    For he shall be king and lord."

  To Tubal Cain came many a one,
    As he wrought by his roaring fire,
  And each one prayed for a strong steel blade
    As the crown of his desire:
  And he made them weapons sharp and strong,
    Till they shouted loud for glee,
  And gave him gifts of pearl and gold,
    And spoils of the forest free.
  And they sang: "Hurrah for Tubal Cain,
    Who hath given us strength anew!
  Hurrah for the smith, hurrah for the fire,
    And hurrah for the metal true!"

  But a sudden change came o'er his heart,
    Ere the setting of the sun,
  And Tubal Cain was filled with pain
    For the evil he had done;
  He saw that men, with rage and hate,
    Made war upon their kind,
  That the land was red with the blood they shed,
    In their lust for carnage blind.
  And he said: "Alas! that ever I made,
    Or that skill of mine should plan,
  The spear and the sword for men whose joy
    Is to slay their fellow-man!"

  And for many a day old Tubal Cain
    Sat brooding o'er his woe;
  And his hand forbore to smite the ore,
    And his furnace smouldered low.
  But he rose at last with a cheerful face,
    And a bright courageous eye,
  And bared his strong right arm for work,
    While the quick flames mounted high.
  And he sang: "Hurrah for my handiwork!"
    And the red sparks lit the air;
  "Not alone for the blade was the bright steel made,"--
    And he fashioned the first ploughshare.

  And men, taught wisdom from the past,
    In friendship joined their hands,
  Hung the sword in the hall, the spear on the wall,
    And ploughed the willing lands;
  And sang: "Hurrah for Tubal Cain!
    Our stanch good friend is he;
  And for the ploughshare and the plough
    To him our praise shall be.
  But while oppression lifts its head,
    Or a tyrant would be lord,
  Though we may thank him for the plough,
    We'll not forget the sword!"

CHARLES MACKAY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE KNIGHT'S TOMB.


  Where is the grave of Sir Arthur O'Kellyn?
  Where may the grave of that good man be?--
  By the side of a spring, on the breast of Helvellyn,
  Under the twigs of a young birch-tree!
  The oak that in summer was sweet to hear,
  And rustled its leaves in the fall of the year,
  And whistled and roared in the winter alone,
  Is gone,--and the birch in its stead is grown.--
  The knight's bones are dust,
  And his good sword rust;--
  His soul is with the saints, I trust.

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.

       *       *       *       *       *




NOT ON THE BATTLE-FIELD.


"To fall on the battle-field fighting for my dear country,--that would
not be hard."--_The Neighbors_.

    O no, no,--let me lie
  Not on a field of battle when I die!
    Let not the iron tread
  Of the mad war-horse crush my helmed head;
    Nor let the reeking knife,
  That I have drawn against a brother's life,
    Be in my hand when Death
  Thunders along, and tramples me beneath
    His heavy squadron's heels,
  Or gory felloes of his cannon's wheels.

    From such a dying bed,
  Though o'er it float the stripes of white and red,
    And the bald eagle brings
  The clustered stars upon his wide-spread wings
    To sparkle in my sight,
  O, never let my spirit take her flight!

    I know that beauty's eye
  Is all the brighter where gay pennants fly,
    And brazen helmets dance,
  And sunshine flashes on the lifted lance;
    I know that bards have sung,
  And people shouted till the welkin rung,
    In honor of the brave
  Who on the battle-field have found a grave;
    I know that o'er their bones
  How grateful hands piled monumental stones.
    Some of those piles I've seen:
  The one at Lexington upon the green
    Where the first blood was shed,
  And to my country's independence led;
    And others, on our shore,
  The "Battle Monument" at Baltimore,
    And that on Bunker's Hill.
  Ay, and abroad, a few more famous still;
    Thy "tomb," Themistocles,
  That looks out yet upon the Grecian seas,
    And which the waters kiss
  That issue from the gulf of Salamis.
    And thine, too, have I seen,
  Thy mound of earth, Patroclus, robed in green,
    That, like a natural knoll,
  Sheep climb and nibble over as they stroll,
    Watched by some turbaned boy,
  Upon the margin of the plain of Troy.
    Such honors grace the bed,
  I know, whereon the warrior lays his head,
    And hears, as life ebbs out,
  The conquered flying, and the conqueror's shout;
    But as his eye grows dim,
  What is a column or a mound to him?
    What, to the parting soul.
  The mellow note of bugles? What the roll
    Of drums? No, let me die
  Where the blue heaven bends o'er me lovingly,
    And the soft summer air,
  As it goes by me, stirs my thin white hair,
    And from my forehead dries
  The death-damp as it gathers, and the skies
    Seem waiting to receive
  My soul to their clear depths! Or let me leave
    The world when round my bed
  Wife, children, weeping friends are gathered,
    And the calm voice of prayer
  And holy hymning shall my soul prepare
    To go and be at rest
  With kindred spirits,--spirits who have blessed
    The human brotherhood
  By labors, cares, and counsels for their good.

JOHN PIERPONT.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE DAY IS COMING.


  Come hither lads and hearken,
    for a tale there is to tell,
  Of the wonderful days a-coming,
    when all shall be better than well.

  And the tale shall be told of a country,
    a land in the midst of the sea,
  And folk shall call it England
    in the days that are going to be.

  There more than one in a thousand,
    in the days that are yet to come,
  Shall have some hope of the morrow,
    some joy of the ancient home.

  For then--laugh not, but listen
    to this strange tale of mine--
  All folk that are in England
    shall be better lodged than swine.

  Then a man shall work and bethink him,
    and rejoice in the deeds of his hand;
  Nor yet come home in the even
    too faint and weary to stand.

  Men in that time a-coming
    shall work and have no fear
  For to-morrow's lack of earning,
    and the hunger-Wolf anear.

  I tell you this for a wonder,
    that no man then shall be glad
  Of his fellow's fall and mishap,
    to snatch at the work he had.

  For that which the worker winneth
    shall then be his indeed,
  Nor shall half be reaped for nothing
    by him that sowed no seed.

  Oh, strange new wonderful justice!
    But for whom shall we gather the gain?
  For ourselves and for each of our fellows,
    and no hand shall labor in vain.

  Then all Mine and all Thine shall be Ours,
    and no more shall any man crave
  For riches that serve for nothing
    but to fetter a friend for a slave.

  And what wealth then shall be left us,
    when none shall gather gold
  To buy his friend in the market,
    and pinch and pine the sold?

  Nay, what save the lovely city,
    and the little house on the hill,
  And the wastes and the woodland beauty,
    and the happy fields we till;

  And the homes of ancient stories,
    the tombs of the mighty dead;
  And the wise men seeking out marvels,
    and the poet's teeming head;

  And the painter's hand of wonder,
    and the marvellous fiddle-bow,
  And the banded choirs of music:
    all those that do and know.

  For all these shall be ours and all men's;
    nor shall any lack a share
  Of the toil and the gain of living,
    in the days when the world grows fair.

  Ah! such are the days that shall be!
    But what are the deeds of to-day,
  In the days of the years we dwell in,
    that wear our lives away?

  Why, then, and for what are we waiting?
    There are three words to speak:
  _We will it_, and what is the foeman
    but the dream-strong wakened and weak?

  Oh, why and for what are we waiting,
    while our brothers droop and die,
  And on every wind of the heavens
    a wasted life goes by?

  How long shall they reproach us,
    where crowd on crowd they dwell,--
  Poor ghosts of the wicked city,
    the gold-crushed hungry hell?

  Through squalid life they labored,
    in sordid grief they died,--
  Those sons of a mighty mother,
    those props of England's pride.

  They are gone; there is none can undo it,
    nor save our souls from the curse:
  But many a million cometh,
    and shall they be better or worse?

  It is we must answer and hasten,
    and open wide the door
  For the rich man's hurrying terror,
    and the slow-foot hope of the poor.

  Yea, the voiceless wrath of the wretched,
    and their unlearned discontent,--
  We must give it voice and wisdom
    till the waiting-tide be spent.

  Come then, since all things call us,
    the living and the dead,
  And o'er the weltering tangle
    a glimmering light is shed.

  Come then, let us cast off fooling,
    and put by ease and rest,
  For the Cause alone is worthy
    till the good days bring the best.

  Come, join in the only battle
    wherein no man can fail,
  Where whoso fadeth and dieth,
    yet his deed shall still prevail.

  Ah! come, cast off all fooling,
    for this, at least, we know:
  That the dawn and the day is coming,
    and forth the banners go.

WILLIAM MORRIS.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE GRAVE OF BONAPARTE.


  On a lone barren isle, where the wild roaring billows
    Assail the stern rock, and the loud tempests rave,
  The hero lies still, while the dew-drooping willows,
    Like fond weeping mourners, lean over the grave.
  The lightnings may flash, and the loud thunders rattle:
    He heeds not, he hears not, he's free from all pain;--
  He sleeps his last sleep--he has fought his last battle!
    No sound can awake him to glory again!

  O shade of the mighty, where now are the legions
    That rushed but to conquer when thou led'st them on?
  Alas! they have perished in far hilly regions,
    And all save the fame of their triumph is gone!
  The trumpet may sound, and the loud cannon rattle!
    They heed not, they hear not, they're free from all pain:
  They sleep their last sleep, they have fought their last battle!
    No sound can awake them to glory again!

  Yet, spirit immortal, the tomb cannot bind thee,
    For, like thine own eagle that soared to the sun,
  Thou springest from bondage and leavest behind thee
    A name which before thee no mortal had won.
  Though nations may combat, and war's thunders rattle,
    No more on the steed wilt thou sweep o'er the plain:
  Thou sleep'st thy last sleep, thou hast fought thy last battle!
    No sound can awake thee to glory again!

LEONARD HEATH.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BATTLE OF BLENHEIM.

[In Bavaria, August 13, 1704, between the English and Austrians on one
side, under the Duke of Marlborough and Prince Eugene, and the French
and Bavarians on the other side, led by Marshal Tallart and the
Elector of Bavaria. The latter party was defeated, and the schemes of
Louis XIV. of France were materially checked.]


  It was a summer evening,--
    Old Kaspar's work was done,
  And he before his cottage door
    Was sitting in the sun;
  And by him sported on the green
  His little grandchild Wilhelmine.

  She saw her brother Peterkin
    Roll something large and round,
  Which he beside the rivulet,
    In playing there, had found;
  He came to ask what he had found
  That was so large and smooth and round.

  Old Kaspar took it from the boy,
    Who stood expectant by;
  And then the old man shook his head,
    And, with a natural sigh,--
  "'Tis some poor fellow's skull," said he,
  "Who fell in the great victory.

  "I find them in the garden,
    For there's many hereabout;
  And often, when I go to plough,
    The ploughshare turns them out;
  For many thousand men," said he,
    "Were slain in the great victory."

  "Now tell us what 'twas all about."
    Young Peterkin he cries;
  And little Wilhelmine looks up
    With wonder-waiting eyes,--
  "Now tell us all about the war,
  And what they fought each other for."

  "It was the English," Kaspar cried,
    "Who put the French to rout;
  But what they fought each other for
    I could not well make out;
  But everybody said," quoth he,
  "That 'twas a famous victory.

  "My father lived at Blenheim then,
    Yon little stream hard by;
  They burnt his dwelling to the ground,
    And he was forced to fly;
  So with his wife and child he fled,
  Nor had he where to rest his head.

  "With fire and sword the country round
    Was wasted far and wide;
  And many a childing mother there,
    And new-born baby died;
  But things like that, you know, must be
  At every famous victory.

  "They say it was a shocking sight
    After the field was won,--
  For many thousand bodies here
    Lay rotting in the sun;
  But things like that, you know must be
  After a famous victory.

  "Great praise the Duke of Marlborough won,
    And our good Prince Eugene."
  "Why, 'twas a very wicked thing!"
    Said little Wilhelmine.
  "Nay, nay, my little girl!" quoth he,
  "It was a famous victory.

  "And everybody praised the duke
    Who this great fight did win."
  "But what good came of it at last?"
    Quoth little Peterkin.
  "Why, that I cannot tell," said he;
  "But 'twas a famous victory."

ROBERT SOUTHEY.

       *       *       *       *       *




AT GIBRALTAR.


  I.

  England, I stand on thy imperial ground
    Not all a stranger; as thy bugles blow,
    I feel within my blood old battles flow,--
  The blood whose ancient founts are in thee found
  Still surging dark against the Christian bound
    While Islam presses; well its peoples know
    Thy heights that watch them wandering below:
  I think how Lucknow heard their gathering sound.

  I turn and meet the cruel, turbaned face.
    England! 'tis sweet to be so much thy son!
  I feel the conqueror in my blood and race;
    Last night Trafalgar awed me, and to-day
  Gibraltar wakened; hark, thy evening gun
    Startles the desert over Africa.


  II.

  Thou art the rock of empire set mid-seas
    Between the East and West, that God has built;
    Advance thy Roman borders where thou wilt,
  While run thy armies true with his decrees;
  Law, justice, liberty,--great gifts are these.
    Watch that they spread where English blood is spilt,
    Lest, mixed and sullied with his country's guilt
  The soldier's life-stream flow, and Heaven displease!

  Two swords there are: one naked, apt to smite,
    Thy blade of war; and, battle-storied, one
  Rejoices in the sheath, and hides from light.
    American I am; would wars were done!
  Now westward, look, my country bids good night,--
    Peace to the world, from ports without a gun!

GEORGE EDWARD WOODBERRY.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BIVOUAC OF THE DEAD.

[Dedication of a monument to Kentucky volunteers, killed at Buena
Vista, Mexico.]


  The muffled drum's sad roll has beat
    The soldier's last tattoo;
  No more on Life's parade shall meet
    That brave and fallen few.
  On Fame's eternal camping-ground
    Their silent tents are spread,
  And Glory guards, with solemn round,
    The bivouac of the dead.

  No rumor of the foe's advance
    Now swells upon the wind;
  No troubled thought at midnight haunts
    Of loved ones left behind;
  No vision of the morrow's strife
    The warrior's dream alarms;
  No braying horn nor screaming fife
    At dawn shall call to arms.

  Their shivered swords are red with rust,
    Their plumed heads are bowed;
  Their haughty banner, trailed in dust,
    Is now their martial shroud.
  And plenteous funeral tears have washed
    The red stains from each brow,
  And the proud forms, by battle gashed,
    Are free from anguish now.

  The neighing troop, the flashing blade,
    The bugle's stirring blast,
  The charge, the dreadful cannonade,
    The din and shout, are past;
  Nor war's wild note nor glory's peal
    Shall thrill with fierce delight
  Those breasts that nevermore may feel
    The rapture of the fight.

  Like the fierce northern hurricane
    That sweeps his great plateau,
  Flushed with the triumph yet to gain,
    Came down the serried foe.
  Who heard the thunder of the fray
    Break o'er the field beneath,
  Knew well the watchword of that day
    Was "Victory or Death."

  Long had the doubtful conflict raged
    O'er all that stricken plain,
  For never fiercer fight had waged
    The vengeful blood of Spain;
  And still the storm of battle blew,
    Still swelled the gory tide;
  Not long, our stout old chieftain knew,
    Such odds his strength could bide.

  'Twas in that hour his stern command
    Called to a martyr's grave
  The flower of his beloved land,
    The nation's flag to save.
  By rivers of their fathers' gore
    His first-born laurels grew,
  And well he deemed the sons would pour
    Their lives for glory too.

  Full many a norther's breath has swept
    O'er Angostura's plain,
  And long the pitying sky has wept
    Above its mouldered slain.
  The raven's scream, or eagle's flight,
    Or shepherd's pensive lay,
  Alone awakes each sullen height
    That frowned o'er that dread fray.

  Sons of the Dark and Bloody Ground,
    Ye must not slumber there,
  Where stranger steps and tongues resound
    Along the heedless air.
  Your own proud land's heroic soil
    Shall be your fitter grave:
  She claims from war his richest spoil--
    The ashes of her brave.

  Thus 'neath their parent turf they rest,
    Far from the gory field,
  Borne to a Spartan mother's breast
    On many a bloody shield;
  The sunshine of their native sky
    Smiles sadly on them here,
  And kindred eyes and hearts watch by
    The heroes' sepulchre.

  Rest on, embalmed and sainted dead!
    Dear as the blood ye gave;
  No impious footstep here shall tread
    The herbage of your grave;
  Nor shall your glory be forgot
    While Fame her record keeps,
  Or Honor points the hallowed spot
    Where Valor proudly sleeps.

  Yon marble minstrel's voiceless stone
    In deathless song shall tell,
  When many a vanished age hath flown,
    The story how ye fell;
  Nor wreck, nor change, nor winter's blight,
    Nor Time's remorseless doom.
  Shall dim one ray of glory's light
    That gilds your deathless tomb.

THEODORE O'HARA.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ARSENAL AT SPRINGFIELD.


  This is the arsenal. From floor to ceiling,
    Like a huge organ, rise the burnished arms;
  But from their silent pipes no anthem pealing
    Startles the villages with strange alarms.

  Ah! what a sound will rise--how wild and dreary--
    When the death-angel touches those swift keys!
  What loud lament and dismal miserere
    Will mingle with their awful symphonies!

  I hear even now the infinite fierce chorus--
    The cries of agony, the endless groan,
  Which, through the ages that have gone before us,
    In long reverberations reach our own.

  On helm and harness rings the Saxon hammer;
    Through Cimbric forest roars the Norseman's song;
  And loud amid the universal clamor,
    O'er distant deserts sounds the Tartar gong.

  I hear the Florentine, who from his palace
    Wheels out his battle-bell with dreadful din;
  And Aztec priests upon their teocallis
    Beat the wild war-drums made of serpents' skin;

  The tumult of each sacked and burning village;
    The shout that every prayer for mercy drowns;
  The soldiers' revels in the midst of pillage;
    The wail of famine in beleaguered towns;

  The bursting shell, the gateway wrenched asunder,
    The rattling musketry, the clashing blade--
  And ever and anon, in tones of thunder,
    The diapason of the cannonade.

  Is it, O man, with such discordant noises,
    With such accursed instruments as these,
  Thou drownest nature's sweet and kindly voices,
    And jarrest the celestial harmonies?

  Were half the power that fills the world with terror,
  Were half the wealth bestowed on camps and courts,
  Given to redeem the human mind from error,
    There were no need of arsenals nor forts;

  The warrior's name would be a name abhorred;
    And every nation that should lift again
  Its hand against a brother, on its forehead
    Would wear forevermore the curse of Cain!

  Down the dark future, through long generations,
    The echoing sounds grow fainter and then cease;
  And like a bell, with solemn, sweet vibrations,
    I hear once more the voice of Christ say, "Peace!"

  Peace!--and no longer from its brazen portals
    The blast of war's great organ shakes the skies;
  But, beautiful as songs of the immortals,
    The holy melodies of love arise.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN OLD BATTLE-FIELD.


  The softest whisperings of the scented South,
  And rust and roses in the cannon's mouth;

  And, where the thunders of the fight were born,
  The wind's sweet tenor in the standing corn;

  With song of larks, low-lingering in the loam,
  And blue skies bending over love and home.

  But still the thought: Somewhere,--upon the hills,
  Or where the vales ring with the whip-poor-wills,

  Sad wistful eyes and broken hearts that beat
  For the loved sound of unreturning feet,

  And, when the oaks their leafy banners wave,
  Dream of the battle and an unmarked grave!

FRANK LEBBY STANTON.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BATTLE-FIELD.


  Once this soft turf, this rivulet's sands,
    Were trampled by a hurrying crowd,
  And fiery hearts and armed hands
    Encountered in the battle-cloud.

  Ah! never shall the land forget
    How gushed the life-blood of her brave,--
  Gushed, warm with hope and courage yet,
    Upon the soil they fought to save.

  Now all is calm and fresh and still;
    Alone the chirp of flitting bird,
  And talk of children on the hill,
    And bell of wandering kine, are heard.

  No solemn host goes trailing by
    The black-mouthed gun and staggering wain;
  Men start not at the battle-cry,--
    O, be it never heard again!

  Soon rested those who fought; but thou
    Who minglest in the harder strife
  For truths which men receive not now,
    Thy warfare only ends with life.

  A friendless warfare! lingering long
    Through weary day and weary year;
  A wild and many-weaponed throng
    Hang on thy front and flank and rear.

  Yet nerve thy spirit to the proof,
    And blench not at thy chosen lot;
  The timid good may stand aloof,
    The sage may frown,--yet faint thou not.

  Nor heed the shaft too surely cast,
    The foul and hissing bolt of scorn;
  For with thy side shall dwell, at last,
    The victory of endurance born.

  Truth, crushed to earth, shall rise again,--
    The eternal years of God are hers;
  But Error, wounded, writhes in pain,
    And dies among his worshippers.

  Yea, though thou lie upon the dust,
    When they who helped thee flee in fear,
  Die full of hope and manly trust,
    Like those who fell in battle here!

  Another hand thy sword shall wield,
    Another hand the standard wave,
  Till from the trumpet's mouth is pealed
    The blast of triumph o'er thy grave.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

       *       *       *       *       *



HOW SLEEP THE BRAVE.


  How sleep the brave who sink to rest
  By all their country's wishes blest!
  When Spring, with dewy fingers cold,
  Returns to deck their hallowed mould,
  She there shall dress a sweeter sod
  Than Fancy's feet have ever trod.

  By fairy hands their knell is rung
  By forms unseen their dirge is sung;
  There Honor comes, a pilgrim gray,
  To bless the turf that wraps their clay;
  And Freedom shall awhile repair,
  To dwell a weeping hermit there!

WILLIAM COLLINS.

       *       *       *       *       *




OUR FALLEN HEROES.


  The angel of the nation's peace
    Has wreathed with flowers the battle-drum;
  We see the fruiting fields increase
    Where sound of war no more shall come.

  The swallow skims the Tennessee,
    Soft winds play o'er the Rapidan;
  There only echo notes of glee,
    Where gleamed a mighty army's van!

  Fair Chattanooga's wooded slope
    With summer airs is lightly stirred,
  And many a heart is warm with hope
    Where once the deep-mouthed gun was heard.

  The blue Potomac stainless rolls,
    And Mission Ridge is gemmed with fern;
  On many a height sleep gallant souls,
    And still the blooming years return.

  Thank God! unseen to outward eye,
    But felt in every freeman's breast,
  From graves where fallen comrades lie
    Ascends at Nature's wise behest,

  With springing grass and blossoms new,
    A prayer to bless the nation's life,
  To freedom's flower give brighter hue,
    And hide the awful stains of strife.

  O, Boys in Blue, we turn to you,
    The scarred and mangled who survive;
  No more we meet in grand review,
    But all the arts of freedom thrive.

  Still glows the jewel in its shrine,
    Won where the James now tranquil rolls;
  Its wealth for all, the glory thine,
    O memory of heroic souls!

GEORGE BANCROFT GRIFFITH.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE CAUSE OF THE SOUTH.

FROM "SENTINEL SONGS."


  The fallen cause still waits,--
    Its bard has not come yet,
  His song--through one of to-morrow's gates
    Shall shine--but never set.

  But when he comes--he'll sweep
    A harp with tears all stringed,
  And the very notes he strikes will weep,
    As they come, from his hand, woe-winged.

  Ah! grand shall be his strain,
    And his songs shall fill all climes,
  And the Rebels shall rise and march again
    Down the lines of his glorious rhymes.

  And through his verse shall gleam
    The swords that flashed in vain,
  And the men who wore the gray shall seem
    To be marshalling again.

  But hush! between his words
    Peer faces sad and pale,
  And you hear the sound of broken chords
    Beat through the poet's wail.

  Through his verse the orphans cry--
    The terrible undertone!
  And the father's curse and the mother's sigh,
    And the desolate young wife's moan.

       *       *       *       *       *

  I sing, with a voice too low
    To be heard beyond to-day,
  In minor keys of my people's woe;
    And my songs pass away.

  To-morrow hears them not--
    To-morrow belongs to fame:
  My songs--like the birds'--will be forgot,
    And forgotten shall be my name.

  And yet who knows! betimes
    The grandest songs depart,
  While the gentle, humble, and low-toned rhymes
    Will echo from heart to heart.

ABRAM JOSEPH RYAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




SENTINEL SONGS.


  When falls the soldier brave
    Dead--at the feet of wrong,--
  The poet sings, and guards his grave
    With sentinels of song.

  Songs, march! he gives command,
    Keep faithful watch and true;
  The living and dead of the Conquered Land
    Have now no guards save you.

  Grave Ballads! mark ye well!
    Thrice holy is your trust!
 Go! halt! by the fields where warriors fell,
   Rest arms! and guard their dust.

 List, Songs! your watch is long!
   The soldiers' guard was brief,
 Whilst right is right, and wrong is wrong,
   Ye may not seek relief.

 Go! wearing the gray of grief!
   Go! watch o'er the Dead in Gray!
 Go guard the private and guard the chief,
   And sentinel their clay!

 And the songs, in stately rhyme,
   And with softly sounding tread,
 Go forth, to watch for a time--a time,
   Where sleep the Deathless Dead.

 And the songs, like funeral dirge,
   In music soft and low,
 Sing round the graves,--whilst not tears surge
   From hearts that are homes of woe.

 What though no sculptured shaft
   Immortalize each brave?
 What though no monument epitaphed
   Be built above each grave?

 When marble wears away,
   And monuments are dust,--
 The songs that guard our soldiers' clay
   Will still fulfil their trust.

  With lifted head, and steady tread,
    Like stars that guard the skies,
  Go watch each bed, where rest the dead,
    Brave Songs! with sleepless eyes.

ABRAM JOSEPH RYAN.

       *       *       *       *       *




ODE.

[Sung on the occasion of decorating the graves of the Confederate
dead, at Magnolia Cemetery, Charleston, S.C.]


  Sleep sweetly in your humble graves,--
    Sleep, martyrs of a fallen cause!
  Though yet no marble column craves
    The pilgrim here to pause,

  In seeds of laurel in the earth
    The blossom of your fame is blown,
  And somewhere, waiting for its birth,
    The shaft is in the stone!

  Meanwhile, behalf the tardy years
    Which keep in trust your storied tombs,
  Behold! your sisters bring their tears,
    And these memorial blooms.

  Small tributes! but your shades will smile
    More proudly on these wreaths to-day,
  Then when some cannon-moulded pile
    Shall overlook this bay.

  Stoop, angels, hither from the skies!
    There is no holier spot of ground
  Than where defeated valor lies,
    By mourning beauty crowned!

HENRY TIMROD.

       *       *       *       *       *




THE BLUE AND THE GRAY.

[The women of Columbus, Mississippi, strewed flowers alike on the
graves of the Confederate and the National soldiers.]


  By the flow of the inland river,
    Whence the fleets of iron have fled,
  Where the blades of the grave-grass quiver
    Asleep are the ranks of the dead;--
      Under the sod and the dew,
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      Under the one, the Blue;
        Under the other, the Gray.

  These in the robing of glory,
    Those in the gloom of defeat,
  All with the battle-blood gory,
    In the dusk of eternity meet;--
      Under the sod and the dew,
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      Under the laurel, the Blue;
        Under the willow, the Gray.

  From the silence of sorrowful hours
    The desolate mourners go,
  Lovingly laden with flowers
    Alike for the friend and the foe,--
      Under the sod and the dew,
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      Under the roses, the Blue;
        Under the lilies, the Gray.

  So with an equal splendor
    The morning sun-rays fall,
  With a touch, impartially tender,
    On the blossoms blooming for all;--
      Under the sod and the dew,
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      'Broidered with gold, the Blue;
        Mellowed with gold, the Gray.

  So when the summer calleth,
    On forest and field of grain
  With an equal murmur falleth
    The cooling drip of the rain;--
      Under the sod and the dew.
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      Wet with the rain, the Blue;
        Wet with the rain, the Gray.

  Sadly, but not with upbraiding,
    The generous deed was done;
  In the storm of the years that are fading,
    No braver battle was won;--
      Under the sod and the dew,
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      Under the blossoms, the Blue;
        Under the garlands, the Gray.

  No more shall the war-cry sever,
    Or the winding rivers be red;
  They banish our anger forever
    When they laurel the graves of our dead!
      Under the sod and the dew,
        Waiting the judgment-day;--
      Love and tears for the Blue,
        Tears and love for the Gray.

FRANCIS MILES FINCH.

       *       *       *       *       *




CENTENNIAL HYMN.

[1876.]


  Our fathers' God! from out whose hand
  The centuries fall like grains of sand,
  We meet to-day, united, free,
  And loyal to our land and Thee,
  To thank Thee for the era done,
  And trust Thee for the opening one.

  Here, where of old, by Thy design,
  The fathers spake that word of Thine
  Whose echo is the glad refrain
  Of rended bolt and falling chain,
  To grace our festal time, from all
  The zones of earth our guests we call.

  Be with us while the New World greets
  The Old World thronging all its streets,
  Unveiling all the triumphs won
  By art or toil beneath the sun;
  And unto common good ordain
  This rivalship of hand and brain.

  Thou, who hast here in concord furled
  The war flags of a gathered world,
  Beneath our Western skies fulfil
  The Orient's mission of good-will,
  And, freighted with love's Golden Fleece,
  Send back its Argonauts of peace.

  For art and labor met in truce,
  For beauty made the bride of use,
  We thank Thee; but, withal, we crave
  The austere virtues strong to save,
  The honor proof to place or gold,
  The manhood never bought nor sold!

  Oh make Thou us, through centuries long,
  In peace secure, in justice strong;
  Around our gift of freedom draw
  The safeguards of thy righteous law:
  And, cast in some diviner mould,
  Let the new cycle shame the old!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

       *       *       *       *       *




HYMN OF THE WEST.[A]

WORLD'S FAIR, ST. LOUIS.

[Footnote A: Copyright 1904 by Robert Allan Reid.]

[1904.]


  O Thou, whose glorious orbs on high
    Engird the earth with splendor round,
  From out Thy secret place draw nigh
    The courts and temples of this ground;
          Eternal Light,
          Fill with Thy might
    These domes that in Thy purpose grew,
    And lift a nation's heart anew!

  Illumine Thou each pathway here,
    To show the marvels God hath wrought
  Since first Thy people's chief and seer
    Looked up with that prophetic thought,
          Bade Time unroll
          The fateful scroll,
    And empire unto Freedom gave
    From cloudland height to tropic wave.

  Poured through the gateways of the North
    Thy mighty rivers join their tide,
  And on the wings of morn sent forth
    Their mists the far-off peaks divide.
          By Thee unsealed,
          The mountains yield
    Ores that the wealth of Ophir shame,
    And gems enwrought of seven-hued flame.

  Lo, through what years the soil hath lain,
    At Thine own time to give increase--
  The greater and the lesser grain,
    The ripening boll, the myriad fleece!
          Thy creatures graze
          Appointed ways;
    League after league across the land
    The ceaseless herds obey Thy hand.

  Thou, whose high archways shine most clear
    Above the plenteous western plain,
  Thine ancient tribes from round the sphere
    To breathe its quickening air are fain;
          And smiles the sun
          To see made one
    Their brood throughout Earth's greenest space,
    Land of the new and lordlier race!

EDMUND CLARENCE STEDMAN.

[The foregoing was the official hymn of the Louisiana Purchase
Exposition at St. Louis in 1904. It was written upon invitation of the
Exposition authorities, and was sung at the opening of the Fair by a
chorus of five hundred voices, to music written for it, also upon
official invitation, by Professor John K. Paine, of Harvard
University. It fitly concludes the poems of Peace, in this volume of
"National Spirit."]Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                    THE WORLD'S
                    BEST POETRY





I Home: Friendship                     VI Fancy: Sentiment
  II Love                            VII Descriptive: Narrative
III Sorrow and Consolation             VIII National Spirit
  IV The Higher Life                 IX Tragedy: Humor
V Nature                               X Poetical Quotations

       *       *       *       *       *


                        THE
                       WORLD'S
                     BEST POETRY


             IN TEN VOLUMES, ILLUSTRATED

                   Editor-in-Chief
                     BLISS CARMAN

                  Associate Editors
                  John Vance Cheney
                 Charles G.D. Roberts
                Charles F. Richardson
                 Francis H. Stoddard

                   Managing Editor
                    John R. Howard


               J.D. Morris and Company
                    Philadelphia



                  COPYRIGHT, 1904, by
                 J.D. Morris & Company



                The World's Best Poetry
                       Vol. III


                     SORROW AND
                     CONSOLATION

                        AN
                   INTERPRETER OF
                       LIFE

                        By
                    LYMAN ABBOTT

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTICE OF COPYRIGHTS.


I.

American poems in this volume within the legal protection of copyright
are used by the courteous permission of the owners,--either the
publishers named in the following list or the authors or their
representatives in the subsequent one,--who reserve all their rights. So
far as practicable, permission has been secured also for poems out of
copyright.

PUBLISHERS OF THE WORLD'S BEST POETRY. 1904.

Messrs. D. APPLETON & Co., New York.--_W.C. Bryant_: "Blessed are They
that Mourn," "The Conqueror's Grave," "Thanatopsis."

Messrs. E.P. DUTTON & Co., New York.--_Mary W. Howland_: "Rest."

The FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY, New York.--_John W. Palmer_: "For Charlie's
Sake."

Messrs. HARPER & BROTHERS, New York.--_Will Carleton_: "Over the Hill to
the Poor House."

Messrs. HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & Co., Boston.--_Margaret Deland_: "Love and
Death;" _John Hay_: "A Woman's Love;" _O.W. Holmes_: "The Last Leaf,"
"The Voiceless;" _Mary Clemmer A. Hudson_: "Something Beyond;" _H.W.
Longfellow_: "Death of Minnehaha," "Footsteps of Angels," "God's Acre,"
"The Rainy Day," "The Reaper and the Flowers," "Resignation;" _J.R.
Lowell_: "Auf Wiedersehen," "First Snow Fall," "Palinode;" _Harriet W.
Preston_: "Fidelity in Doubt;" _Margaret E. Sangster_: "Are the Children
at Home?" _E.R. Sill_: "A Morning Thought;" _Harriet E. Spofford_: "The
Nun and Harp;" _Harriet B. Stowe_: "Lines to the Memory of Annie." "Only
a Year;" _J.T. Trowbridge_: "Dorothy in the Garret;" _J.G. Whittier_:
"To Her Absent Sailor," "Angel of Patience," "Maud Muller."

Mr. JOHN LANE, New York.--_R. Le Gallienne_: "Song," "What of the
Darkness?"

Messrs. LITTLE, BROWN & Co., Boston.--_J.W. Chadwick_: "The Two
Waitings;" _Helen Hunt Jackson_: "Habeas Corpus."

The LOTHROP PUBLISHING COMPANY, Boston.--_Paul H. Hayne_: "In Harbor."

Messrs. G.P. PUTNAM'S SONS, New York.--_Elaine Goodale Eastman_: "Ashes
of Roses;" _R.C. Rogers_: "The Shadow Rose."

Messrs. CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, New York.--_R. Bridges (Droch)_: "The
Unillumined Verge;" _Mary Mapes Dodge_: "The Two Mysteries;" _Julia C.R.
Dorr_: "Hush" (Afterglow).


II.

American poems in this volume by the authors whose names are given below
are the copyrighted property of the authors, or of their representatives
named in parenthesis, and may not be reprinted without their permission,
which for the present work has been courteously granted.

PUBLISHERS OF THE WORLD'S BEST POETRY. 1904.

_W.R. Alger; Mrs. Amelia E. Barr; Henry A. Blood_ (Mrs. R.E. Whitman);
_Robert J. Burdette; John Burroughs; Mary A. De Vere; Nathan H. Dole;
William C. Gannett; Dr. Silas W. Mitchell; Mrs. Sarah M. Piatt; Walt
Whitman_ (H. Traubel, Literary Executor).

       *       *       *       *       *




AN INTERPRETER OF LIFE.

BY LYMAN ABBOTT.



Poetry, music, and painting are three correlated arts, connected not
merely by an accidental classification, but by their intrinsic nature.
For they all possess the same essential function, namely, to interpret
the uninterpretable, to reveal the undiscoverable, to express the
inexpressible. They all attempt, in different forms and through
different languages, to translate the invisible and eternal into
sensuous forms, and through sensuous forms to produce in other souls
experiences akin to those in the soul of the translator, be he poet,
musician, or painter. That they are three correlated arts, attempting,
each in its own way and by its own language, to express the same
essential life, is indicated by their co-operation in the musical drama.
This is the principle which Wagner saw so clearly, and has used to such
effective purpose in his so-called operas, whose resemblance to the
Italian operas which preceded them is more superficial than real. In the
drama Wagner wishes you to consider neither the music apart from the
scenery, nor the scenery apart from the acting, nor the three apart from
the poetry. Poetry, music, and art combine with the actor to interpret
truths of life which transcend philosophic definition. Thus in the first
act of "Parsifal," innocence born of ignorance, remorse born of the
experience of temptation and sin, and reverence bred in an atmosphere
not innocent yet free from the experience of great temptation, mingle in
a drama which elevates all hearts, because in some one of these three
phases it touches every heart. And yet certain of the clergy condemned
the presentation as irreverent, because it expresses reverence in a
symbolism to which they were unaccustomed.

But while it is true that these three arts are correlative and
co-operative, they do not duplicate one another. Each not only speaks in
a language of its own, but expresses in that language a life which the
others cannot express. As color and fragrance combine to make the
flower, but the color expresses what the fragrance cannot express, and
the fragrance expresses what the color cannot express, so in the musical
drama, music, poetry, and painting combine, not by duplicating but by
supplementing each other. One may describe in language a symphony; but
no description will produce the effect which the symphony produces. One
may describe a painting; but no description will produce the effect
which the painting will produce. So neither music, nor painting, nor
both combined, can produce the same effect on the soul as poetry. The
"Midsummer Night's Dream" enacted in pantomime, with Mendelssohn's
music, would no more produce the same effect on the auditors which would
be produced by the interpretation of the play in spoken words, than
would the reading of the play at home produce the same effect as the
enacting of the play with what are miscalled the accessories of music
and scenery. The music and scenery are no more accessories to the words
than the words are accessories to the music and scenery. The three
combine in a triple language to express and produce one life, and it can
be expressed and produced in no other way than by the combination of the
three arts in harmonious action. This is the reason why no parlor
readings can ever take the place of the theatre, and no concert
performance can ever take the place of the opera. This is the reason why
all attempts to suppress the theatre and opera are and always will be in
vain. They are attempts to suppress the expression and awakening of a
life which can neither be expressed nor awakened in any other way; and
suppression of life, however successfully it may be accomplished for a
time, is never permanently possible.

These arts do not truly create, they interpret. Man is not a creator, he
is only a discoverer. The imagination is not creative, it is only
reportorial. Ideals are realities; imagination is seeing. The musician,
the artist, the poet, discover life which others have not discovered,
and each with his own instrument interprets that life to those less
sensitive than himself. Observe a musician composing. He writes; stops;
hesitates; meditates; perhaps hums softly to himself; perhaps goes to
the piano and strikes a chord or two. What is he doing? He is trying to
express to himself a beauty which he has heard in the world of infinite
phenomena, and to reproduce it as well as sensuous sounds can reproduce
it, that those with duller hearing than himself may hear it also.
Observe a painter before his easel. He paints; looks to see the effect;
erases; adds; modifies; reexamines; and repeats this operation over and
over again. What is he doing? He is copying a beauty which he has seen
in the invisible world, and which he is attempting to bring out from its
hiding so that the men who have no eyes except for the sensuous may also
see it. In my library is an original sonnet by John G. Whittier. In
almost every line are erasures and interlineations. In some cases the
careful poet has written a new line and pasted it over the rejected one.
What does this mean? It means that he has discovered a truth of moral
beauty and is attempting to interpret his discovery to the world. His
first interpretation of his vision did not suit him, nor his second, nor
his third, and he has revised and re-revised in the attempt to make his
verse a true interpretation of the truth which he had seen. He did not
make the truth; it eternally was. Neither did the musician make the
truth of harmony, nor the painter the truth of form and color. They also
eternally were. Poet, musician, painter, have seen, heard, felt,
realized in their own souls some experience of life, some potent reality
which philosophy cannot formulate, nor creed contain, nor eloquence
define; and each in his own way endeavors to give it to the world of
men; each in his own way endeavors to lift the gauzy curtain,
impenetrable to most souls, which hides the invisible, the inaudible,
the eternal, the divine from men; and he gives them a glimpse of that of
which he himself had but a glimpse.

In one sense and in one only can art be called creative: the artist,
whether he be painter, musician, or poet, so interprets to other men the
experience which has been created in him by his vision of the
supersensible and eternal, that he evokes in them a similar experience.
He is a creator only as he conveys to others the life which has been
created in himself. As the electric wire creates light in the home; as
the band creates the movement in the machinery; thus and only thus does
the artist create life in those that wait upon him. He is in truth an
interpreter and transmitter, not a creator. Nor can he interpret what he
has not first received, nor transmit what he has not first experienced.
The music, the painting, the poem are merely the instruments which he
uses for that purpose. The life must first be in him or the so-called
music, painting, poem are but dead simulacra; imitations of art, not
real art. This is the reason why no mechanical device, be it never so
skillfully contrived, can ever take the place of the living artist. The
pianola can never rival the living performer; nor the orchestrion the
orchestra; nor the chromo the painting. No mechanical device has yet
been invented to produce poetry; even if some shrewd Yankee should
invent a printing machine which would pick out rhymes as some printing
machines seem to pick out letters, the result would not be a poem. This
is the reason too why mere perfection of execution never really
satisfies. "She sings like a bird." Yes! and that is exactly the
difficulty with her. We want one who sings like a woman. The popular
criticism of the mere musical expert that he has no soul, is profound
and true. It is soul we want; for the piano, the organ, the violin, the
orchestra, are only instruments for the transmission of soul. This is
also the reason why the most flawless conductor is not always the best.
He must have a soul capable of reading the soul of the composer; and the
orchestra must receive the life of the composer as that is interpreted
to them through the life of the conductor, or the performance will be a
soulless performance.

Into each of these arts, therefore--music, painting, poetry--enter two
elements: the inner and the outer, the truth and the language, the
reality and the symbol, the life and the expression. Without the
electric current the carbon is a mere blank thread; the electric current
is not luminous if there be no carbon. The life and the form are alike
essential. So the painter must have something to express, but he must
also have skill to express it; the musician must have music in his soul,
but he must also have a power of instrumentation; the poet must feel the
truth, or he is no poet, but he must also have power to express what he
feels in such forms as will create a similar feeling in his readers, or
he is still no poet. Multitudes of women send to the newspapers poetical
effusions which, are not poems. The feeling of the writer is excellent,
but the expression is bad. The writer has seen, but she cannot tell what
she has seen; she has felt, but she cannot express her experience so as
to enkindle a like experience in others. These poetical utterances of
inarticulate poets are sometimes whimsical but oftener pathetic;
sometimes they are like the prattle of little children who exercise
their vocal organs before they have anything to say; but oftener they
seem to me like the beseeching eyes of a dumb animal, full of affection
and entreaty for which he has no vocal expression. It is just as
essential that poetical feeling should have poetical expression in order
to constitute poetry as it is that musical feeling should have musical
expression in order to constitute music. And, on the other hand, as
splashes of color without artistic feeling which they interpret are not
art, as musical, sounds without musical feeling which they interpret are
not music, so poetical forms without poetical feeling are not poetry.
Poetical feeling in unpoetical forms may be poetical prose, but it is
still prose. And on the other hand, rhymes, however musical they may be
to the ear, are only rhymes, not poetry, unless they express a true
poetical life.

But these two elements are separable only in thought, not in reality.
Poetry is not common thought expressed in an uncommon manner; it is not
an artificial phrasing of even the higher emotions. The higher emotions
have a phrasing of their own; they fall naturally--whether as the result
of instinct or of habit need not here be considered--into fitting forms.
The form may be rhyme; it may be blank verse; it may be the old Hebrew
parallelism; it may even be the indescribable form which Walt Whitman
has adopted. What is noticeable is the fact that poetical thought, if it
is at its best, always takes on, by a kind of necessity, some poetical
form. To illustrate if not to demonstrate this, it is only necessary to
select from literature any fine piece of poetical expression of a higher
and nobler emotion, or of clear and inspiring vision, and attempt to put
it into prose form. The reader will find, if he be dealing with the
highest poetry, that translating it into prose impairs its power to
express the feeling, and makes the expression not less but more
artificial. If he doubt this statement, let him turn to any of the finer
specimens of verse in this volume and see whether he can express the
life in prose as truly, as naturally, as effectively, as it is there
expressed in rhythmical form.

These various considerations may help to explain why in all ages of the
world the arts have been the handmaidens of religion. Not to amplify
too much, I have confined these considerations to the three arts of
music, painting, and poetry; but they are also applicable to sculpture
and architecture. All are attempts by men of vision to interpret to the
men who are not equally endowed with vision, what the invisible world
about us and within us has for the enrichment of our lives. This is
exactly the function of religion: to enrich human lives by making them
acquainted with the infinite. It is true that at times the arts have
been sensualized, the emphasis has been put on the form of expression,
not on the life expressed; and then reformers, like the Puritans and the
Quakers, have endeavored to exclude the arts from religion, lest they
should contaminate it. But the exclusion has been accomplished with
difficulty, and to maintain it has been impossible. It is neither an
accident, nor a sign of decadence, that painting and sculpture are
creeping back into the Protestant churches, to combine with poetry and
music in expressing the religious life of man. For the intellect alone
is inadequate either to express that life as it exists, or to call it
into existence where it does not exist. The tendency to ritual in our
time is a tendency not to substitute aesthetic for spiritual life, though
there is probably always a danger that such a substitution may be
unconsciously made, but to express a religious life which cannot be
expressed without the aid of aesthetic symbols. The work of the intellect
is to analyze and define. But the infinite is in the nature of the case
indefinable, and it is with the infinite religion has to do. All that
theology can hope to accomplish is to define certain provinces in the
illimitable realm of truth; to analyze certain experiences in a life
which transcends all complete analysis. The Church must learn to regard
not with disfavor or suspicion, but with eager acceptance, the
co-operation of the arts in the interpretation of infinite truth and the
expression of infinite life. Certainly we are not to turn our churches
into concert rooms or picture and sculpture galleries, and imagine that
aesthetic enjoyment is synonymous with piety. But as surely we are not to
banish the arts from our churches, and think that we are religious
because we are barren. All language, whether of painting, sculpture,
architecture, music, poetry, or oratory, is legitimately used to express
the divine life, as all the faculties, whether of painter, sculptor,
architect, musician, poet, orator, and philosopher, are to be used in
reaching after a more perfect knowledge of Him who always transcends and
always will transcend our perfect knowing.

Thus the study of poetry is the study of life, because poetry is the
interpretation of life. Poetry is not a mere instrument for promoting
enjoyment; it does not merely dazzle the imagination and excite the
emotions. Through the emotions and the imagination it both interprets
life and ministers to life. When the critic attempts to express that
truth, that is, to interpret the interpreter, which he can do only by
translating the poetry into prose, and the language of imagination and
emotion into that of philosophy, he destroys the poem in the process,
much as the botanist destroys the flower in analyzing it, or the musical
critic the composition in disentangling its interwoven melodies and
explaining the mature of its harmonic structure. The analysis, whether
of music, art, or poetry, must be followed by a synthesis, which, in the
nature of the case, can be accomplished only by the hearer or reader for
himself. All that I can do here is to illustrate this revelatory
character of poetry by some references to the poems which this volume
contains. I do not attempt to explain the meaning of these poems; that
is a task quite impossible. I only attempt to show that they have a
meaning, that beneath their beauty of form is a depth of truth which
philosophical statement in prose cannot interpret, but the essence of
which such statement may serve to suggest. I do not wish to expound the
truth of life which is contained in the poet's verse; I only wish to
show that the poet by his verse reveals a truth of life which the critic
cannot express, and that it is for this reason pre-eminently that such a
collection of poetry as this is deserving of the reader's study.

If for example the student turns to such a volume as Newman Smyth's
"Christian Ethics," he will find there a careful though condensed
discussion of the right and wrong of suicide. It is cool, deliberate,
philosophical. But it gives no slightest hint of the real state of the
man who is deliberating within himself whether he will commit suicide
or no; no hint of the real arguments that pass in shadow through his
mind:--the weariness of life which summons him to end all; the nameless,
indefinable dread of the mystery and darkness and night into which death
carries us, which makes him hesitate. If we would really understand the
mind of the suicide, not merely the mind of the philosopher coolly
debating suicide, we must turn to the poet.

     "To be, or not to be: that is the question:
     Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer
     The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
     Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
     And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep;
     No more; and by a sleep to say we end
     The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks
     That flesh is heir to, 't is a consummation
     Devoutly to be wished. To die, to sleep;
     To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub;
     For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
     When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
     Must give us pause: there's the respect
     That makes calamity of so long life;
     For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
     The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
     The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
     The insolence of office, and the spurns
     That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
     When he himself might his quietus make
     With a bare bodkin! Who would fardels bear,
     To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
     But that the dread of something after death,
     The undiscovered country from whose bourne
     No traveller returns, puzzles the will
     And makes us rather bear those ills we have
     Than fly to others that we know not of?
     Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
     And thus the native hue of resolution
     Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
     And enterprises of great pith and moment
     With this regard their currents turn awry,
     And lose the name of action."

This first the poet does: he draws aside the veil which hides the
working of men's hearts, and lets us see their hidden life. But he does
more. Not merely does he afford us knowledge, he imparts life. For we
know feeling only by participating in the feeling; and the poet has the
art not merely to describe the experiences of men but so to describe
them that for the moment we share them, and so truly know them by the
only process by which they can be known. Who, for instance, can read
Thomas Hood's "The Bridge of Sighs" and not, as he reads, stand by the
despairing one as she waits a moment upon the bridge just ready to take
her last leap out of the cruelty of this world into, let us hope, the
mercy of a more merciful world beyond?

     "Where the lamps quiver
     So far in the river,
     With many a light
     From window and casement,
     From garret to basement,
     She stood, with amazement,
     Homeless by night.

     "The bleak wind of March
     Made her tremble and shiver;
     But not the dark arch,
     Or the black flowing river:
     Mad from life's history,
     Glad to death's mystery
     Swift to be hurled--
     Anywhere, anywhere
     Out of the world.

     "In she plunged boldly--
     No matter how coldly
     The rough river ran,--
     Over the brink of it!
     Picture it--think of it,
     Dissolute man!
     Lave in it, drink of it,
     Then, if you can.

     "Take her up tenderly,
     Lift her with care;
     Fashioned so slenderly,
     Young, and so fair!"

No analysis of philosophy can make us acquainted with the tragedy of
this life as the poet can; no exhortation of preacher can so effectively
arouse in us the spirit of a Christian charity for the despairing
wanderer as the poet.

Would you know the tragedy of a careless and supercilious coquetry which
plays with the heart as the fisherman plays with the salmon? Read "Clara
Vere de Vere." Would you know the dull heartache of a loveless married
life, growing at times into an intolerable anguish which no marital
fidelity can do much to medicate? Read "Auld Robin Gray." Who but a poet
can interpret the pain of a parting between loving hearts, with its
remorseful recollections of the wholly innocent love's joys that are
past?

     "Had we never loved sae kindly,
     Had we never loved sae blindly,
     Never met--or never parted,
     We had ne'er been broken hearted."

Who but a poet can depict the perils of an unconscious drifting apart,
such as has destroyed many a friendship and wrecked many a married life,
as Clough has depicted it in "Qua Cursum Ventus"? If you would know the
life-long sorrow of the blind man at your side, would enter into his
life and for a brief moment share his captivity, read Milton's
interpretation of that sorrow in Samson's Lament. If you would find some
message to cheer the blind man in his darkness and illumine his
captivity, read the same poet's ode on his own blindness:

                                 "God doth not need
     Either man's work, or his own gifts; who best
     Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best: his state
     Is kingly; thousands at his bidding speed,
     And post o'er land and ocean without rest;
     They also serve who only stand and wait."

No prison statistics, no police reports, no reformer's documents, no
public discussions of the question, What to do with the tramp, will ever
so make the student of life participant of the innermost experience of
the tramp, his experience of dull despair, his loss of his grip on life,
as Beranger's "The Old Vagabond." No expert in nervous diseases, no
psychological student of mental states, normal and abnormal, can give
the reader so clear an understanding of that deep and seemingly
causeless dejection, which because it seems to be causeless seems also
to be well-nigh incurable, as Percy Bysshe Shelley has given in his
"Stanzas written near Naples." No critical expounder of the Stoical
philosophy can interpret the stoical temper which interposes a sullen
but dauntless pride to attacking sorrow as William Ernest Henley has
done:

     "Out of the night that covers me,
       Black as the pit from pole to pole,
     I thank whatever gods may be
       For my unconquerable soul.

     "In the fell clutch of circumstance
       I have not winced nor cried aloud.
     Under the bludgeonings of chance
       My head is bloody, but unbowed."

Nor can any preacher put in so vital a contrast to this despairing
defiance with which pride challenges sorrow, the joyous victory which a
trusting love wins over it by submitting to it, as John Greenleaf
Whittier has done in "The Eternal Goodness":

     "I know not what the future hath
       Of marvel or surprise,
     Assured alone that life and death
       His mercy underlies.

     "I know not where His islands lift
       Their fronded palms in air:
     I only know I cannot drift
       Beyond His love and care."

No philosophical treatise can interpret bereavement as the great poets
have interpreted it. The mystery of sorrow, the bewilderment it causes,
the wonder whether there is any God or any good, the silence that is the
only answer to our call for help, the tumult of emotion, the strange
perplexity of mind, the dull despair, the inexplicable paralysis of
feeling, intermingling in one wholly inconsistent and incongruous
experience: where, in all the literature of Philosophy can we find such
an exposition and echo and interpretation of this experience as in that
great Hebrew epic--the Book of Job? And where in all the literature of
Philosophy can we find such interpreters of the two great comforters of
the soul, faith and hope, as one finds in the poets? They do not argue;
they simply sing. And, as a note struck upon one of a chime of bells
will set the neighboring bell vibrating, so the strong note of faith and
hope sounded by the poet, sets a like note vibrating in the mourner's
heart. The mystery is not solved, but the silence is broken. First we
listen to the poet, then we listen to the same song sung in our own
hearts,--the same, for it is God who has sung to him and who sings to
us. And when the bereaved has found God, he has found light in his
darkness, peace in his tempest, a ray in his night.

                                "As a child,
     Whose song-bird seeks the wood forevermore,
     Is sung to in its stead by mother's mouth;
     Till, sinking on her breast, love-reconciled,
     He sleep the faster that he wept before."

The visitor to the island of Catalina, off the coast of California, is
invited to go out in a glass-bottomed boat upon the sea. If he accepts
the invitation and looks about him with careless curiosity, he will
enjoy the blue of the summer sky and ocean wave, and the architectural
beauty of the island hills; but if he turns his gaze downward and looks
through the glass bottom of the boat in which he is sailing, he will
discover manifold phases of beauty in the life beneath the sea waves: in
goldfish darting hither and thither, in umbrella-shaped jellyfish lazily
swimming by, in starfish and anemones of infinite variety, in
sea-urchins brilliant in color, and in an endless forest of water-weeds
exquisitely delicate in their structure. Perhaps he will try to
photograph them; but in vain: his camera will render him no report of
the wealth of life which he has seen. So he who takes up such a volume
of poetry as this will find ample repayment in the successive pictures
which it presents to his imagination, and the transient emotions which
it will excite in him. But besides this there is a secret life which the
careless reader will fail to see, and which the critic cannot report,
but which will be revealed to the thoughtful, patient, meditative
student. In this power to reveal an otherwise unknown world, lies the
true glory of poetry. He that hath ears to hear, let him hear what the
poet has to say to him.

[Signature: Lyman Abbot]

       *       *       *       *       *



         TABLE OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTORY ESSAY:

  "AN INTERPRETER OF LIFE." By _Lyman Abbot_


POEMS OF SORROW AND CONSOLATION:

  DISAPPOINTMENT IN LOVE
  PARTING AND ABSENCE
  ADVERSITY
  COMFORT AND CHEER
  DEATH AND BEREAVEMENT
  CONSOLATION


INDEX: AUTHORS AND TITLES


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW _Frontispiece_

    _Photogravure from photograph by Hanfstaengl after portrait by Kramer_.

PENELOPE AWAITING ULYSSES

    _The patient grief and endurance of Absence: while the tapestry
    woven by day stands on the frame to be unravelled by night, as the
    loyal wife puts off her suitors. Painting by Rudolph von Deutsch_.

ABSENCE

    "What shall I do with all the days and hours
    That must be counted ere I see thy face?"

    _From a photograph by the Berlin Photographic Co., after a painting by
    R. Poetzelberger_.

WAIL OF PROMETHEUS BOUND

    "Behold me, a god, what I endure from gods!
      Behold, with throe on throe,
      How, wasted by this woe,
    I wrestle down the myriad years of Time!"

    _From photograph after a painting by G. Graeff_.


PIERRE-JEAN DE BERANGER

    _From lithograph after a crayon-drawing by H. Alophe_.


THOMAS HOOD

    _After an engraving from contemporary portrait_.


ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

    _After a photograph from life by Talfourd, London_.

THE COUNTRY CHURCHYARD

    "Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
      Where heaves the turf in many a moldering heap,
    Each in his narrow cell forever laid,
      The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep."

    _After an original drawing by Harry Fenn_.


LOVE AND DEATH

    "Death comes in,
    Though Love, with outstretched arms and wings outspread,
    Would bar the way."

    _From photogravure after the painting by George Fredeick Watts_.

WALT WHITMAN

    _After a life-photograph by Rockwood, New York_.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE

    _From an engraving after the drawing by George Richmond_.


SIR EDWIN ARNOLD

    _After a life-photograph by Elliott and Fry, London_.




       *       *       *       *       *


        POEMS OF SORROW AND CONSOLATION.


       *       *       *       *       *




I. DISAPPOINTMENT IN LOVE.



THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE.

     FROM "MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM," ACT I. SC. 1.


For aught that ever I could read,
Could ever hear by tale or history,
The course of true love never did run smooth:
But, either it was different in blood,
Or else misgraffed in respect of years,
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends;
Or, if there were a sympathy in choice,
War, death, or sickness did lay siege to it,
Making it momentary as a sound,
Swift as a shadow, short as any dream;
Brief as the lightning in the collied night,
That, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth,
And ere a man hath power to say,--Behold!
The jaws of darkness do devour it up:
So quick bright things come to confusion.

SHAKESPEARE.



LADY CLARA VERE DE VERE.


Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  Of me you shall not win renown;
You thought to break a country heart
  For pastime, ere you went to town.
At me you smiled, but unbeguiled
  I saw the snare, and I retired:
The daughter of a hundred Earls,
  You are not one to be desired.

Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  I know you proud to bear your name;
Your pride is yet no mate for mine,
  Too proud to care from whence I came.
Nor would I break for your sweet sake
  A heart that dotes on truer charms.
A simple maiden in her flower
  Is worth a hundred coats-of-arms.

Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  Some meeker pupil you must find,
For were you queen of all that is,
  I could not stoop to such a mind.
You sought to prove how I could love,
  And my disdain is my reply.
The lion on your old stone gates
  Is not more cold to you than I.

Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  You put strange memories in my head.
Not thrice your branching lines have blown
  Since I beheld young Laurence dead.
O your sweet eyes, your low replies:
  A great enchantress you may be;
But there was that across his throat
  Which you had hardly cared to see.

Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  When thus he met his mother's view,
She had the passions of her kind,
  She spake some certain truths of you.
Indeed I heard one bitter word
  That scarce is fit for you to hear;
Her manners had not that repose
  Which stamps the caste of Vere de Vere.

Lady Clara Vere de Vere,
  There stands a spectre in your hall:
The guilt of blood is at your door:
  You changed a wholesome heart to gall.
You held your course without remorse,
  To make him trust his modest worth,
And, last, you fixed a vacant stare,
  And slew him with your noble birth.

Trust me, Clara Vere de Vere,
  From yon blue heavens above us bent
The grand old gardener and his wife
  Smile at the claims of long descent.
Howe'er it be, it seems to me,
  'T is only noble to be good.
Kind hearts are more than coronets,
  And simple faith than Norman blood.

I know you, Clara Vere de Vere:
  You pine among your halls and towers:
The languid light of your proud eyes
  Is wearied of the rolling hours.
In glowing health, with boundless wealth,
  But sickening of a vague disease,
You know so ill to deal with time,
  You needs must play such pranks as these.

Clara, Clara Vere de Vere,
  If Time be heavy on your hands,
Are there no beggars at your gate.
  Nor any poor about your lands?
Oh! teach the orphan-boy to read,
  Or teach the orphan-girl to sew,
Pray Heaven for a human heart,
  And let the foolish yeoman go.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



LINDA TO HAFED.

     FROM "THE FIRE-WORSHIPPERS."


"How sweetly," said the trembling maid,
Of her own gentle voice afraid,
So long had they in silence stood,
Looking upon that moonlight flood,--
"How sweetly does the moonbeam smile
To-night upon yon leafy isle!
Oft in my fancy's wanderings,
I've wished that little isle had wings,
And we, within its fairy bowers,
  Were wafted off to seas unknown,
Where not a pulse should beat but ours,
  And we might live, love, die alone!
Far from the cruel and the cold,--
  Where the bright eyes of angels only
Should come around us, to behold
  A paradise so pure and lonely!
Would this be world enough for thee?"--
Playful she turned, that he might see
  The passing smile her cheek put on;
But when she marked how mournfully
  His eyes met hers, that smile was gone;
And, bursting into heartfelt tears,
"Yes, yes," she cried, "my hourly fears,
My dreams, have boded all too right,--
We part--forever part--to-night!
I knew, I knew it _could_ not last,--
'T was bright, 't was heavenly, but 't is past!
O, ever thus, from childhood's hour,
  I've seen my fondest hopes decay;
I never loved a tree or flower
  But 't was the first to fade away.
I never nursed a dear gazelle,
  To glad me with its soft black eye,
But when it came to know me well,
  And love me, it was sure to die!
Now, too, the joy most like divine
  Of all I ever dreamt or knew,
To see thee, hear thee, call thee mine,--
  O misery! must I lose _that_ too?"

THOMAS MOORE.



LOVE NOT.


Love not, love not, ye hapless sons of clay!
Hope's gayest wreaths are made of earthly flowers,--
Things that are made to fade and fall away
Ere they have blossomed for a few short hours.
    Love not!

Love not! the thing ye love may change;
The rosy lip may cease to smile on you,
The kindly-beaming eye grow cold and strange,
The heart still warmly beat, yet not be true.
    Love not!

Love not! the thing you love may die,--
May perish from the gay and gladsome earth;
The silent stars, the blue and smiling sky,
Beam o'er its grave, as once upon its birth.
    Love not!

Love not! O warning vainly said
In present hours as in years gone by!
Love flings a halo round the dear one's head,
Faultless, immortal, till they change or die.
    Love not!

CAROLINE ELIZABETH SHERIDAN. (HON. MRS. NORTON.)



THE PRINCESS.


The Princess sat lone in her maiden bower,
The lad blew his horn at the foot of the tower.
"Why playest thou alway? Be silent, I pray,
It fetters my thoughts that would flee far away.
    As the sun goes down."

In her maiden bower sat the Princess forlorn,
The lad had ceased to play on his horn.
"Oh, why art thou silent? I beg thee to play!
It gives wings to my thought that would flee far away,
    As the sun goes down."

In her maiden bower sat the Princess forlorn,
Once more with delight played the lad on his horn.
She wept as the shadows grew long, and she sighed:
"Oh, tell me, my God, what my heart doth betide,
    Now the sun has gone down."

From the Norwegian of BJOeRNSTJERNE BJOeRNSON.
Translation of NATHAN HASKELL DOLE.



UNREQUITED LOVE.

     FROM "TWELFTH NIGHT," ACT I. SC. 4.


VIOLA.--Ay, but I know,--

DUKE. What dost thou know?

VIOLA.--Too well what love women to men may owe:
In faith, they are as true of heart as we.
My father had a daughter loved a man,
As it might be, perhaps, were I a woman,
I should your lordship.

DUKE.--And what's her history?

VIOLA.--A blank, my lord. She never told her love,
But let concealment, like a worm i' the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek; she pined in thought;
And, with a green and yellow melancholy,
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief. Was not this love, indeed?
We men may say more, swear more: but, indeed,
Our shows are more than will; for still we prove
Much in our vows, but little in our love.

SHAKESPEARE.



FAIR INES.


O saw ye not fair Ines? she's gone into the west,
To dazzle when the sun is down, and rob the world of rest;
She took our daylight with her, the smiles that we love best,
With morning blushes on her cheek, and pearls upon her breast.

O turn again, fair Ines, before the fall of night,
For fear the moon should shine alone, and stars unrivalled bright;
And blessed will the lover be that walks beneath their light,
And breathes the love against thy cheek I dare not even write!

Would I had been, fair Ines, that gallant cavalier
Who rode so gayly by thy side and whispered thee so near!
Were there no bonny dames at home, or no true lovers here,
That he should cross the seas to win the dearest of the dear?

I saw thee, lovely Ines, descend along the shore,
With bands of noble gentlemen, and banners waved before;
And gentle youth and maidens gay, and snowy plumes they wore;--
It would have been a beauteous dream--if it had been no more!

Alas! alas! fair Ines! she went away with song,
With music waiting on her steps, and shoutings of the throng;
But some were sad, and felt no mirth, but only Music's wrong,
In sounds that sang Farewell, Farewell to her you've loved so long.

Farewell, farewell, fair Ines! that vessel never bore
So fair a lady on its deck, nor danced so light before--
Alas for pleasure on the sea, and sorrow on the shore!
The smile that blest one lover's heart has broken many more!

THOMAS HOOD.



THE BANKS O' DOON.


Ye banks and braes o' bonnie Doon,
  How can ye bloom sae fresh and fair?
How can ye chant, ye little birds,
  And I sae weary, fu' o' care?

Thou'lt break my heart, thou warbling bird,
  That wantons through the flowering thorn;
Thou minds me o' departed joys,
  Departed--never to return.

Thou'lt break my heart, thou bonnie bird,
  That sings beside thy mate;
For sae I sat, and sae I sang,
  And wistna o' my fate.

Aft hae I roved by bonnie Doon,
  To see the rose and woodbine twine;
And ilka bird sang o' its luve,
  And, fondly, sae did I o' mine.

Wi' lightsome heart I pou'd a rose,
  Fu' sweet upon its thorny tree;
And my fause luver stole my rose,
  But ah! he left the thorn wi' me.

ROBERT BURNS.



SONNET.

     FROM "ASTROPHEL AND STELLA."


With how sad steps, O Moon! thou climb'st the skies,
How silently, and with how wan a face!
What may it be, that even in heavenly place
That busy Archer his sharp arrows tries?
Sure, if that long-with-love-acquainted eyes
Can judge of love, thou feel'st a lover's case;
I read it in thy looks; thy languished grace
To me, that feel the like, thy state descries.
Then, even of fellowship, O Moon, tell me,
Is constant love deemed there but want of wit?
Are beauties there as proud as here they be?
Do they above love to be loved, and yet
Those lovers scorn whom that love doth possess?
Do they call virtue there ungratefulness?

SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.



AGATHA.


She wanders in the April woods,
  That glisten with the fallen shower;
She leans her face against the buds,
  She stops, she stoops, she plucks a flower.
  She feels the ferment of the hour:
She broodeth when the ringdove broods;
  The sun and flying clouds have power
Upon her cheek and changing moods.
  She cannot think she is alone,
    As over her senses warmly steal
  Floods of unrest she fears to own
    And almost dreads to feel.

Among the summer woodlands wide
  Anew she roams, no more alone;
The joy she feared is at her side,
  Spring's blushing secret now is known.
  The primrose and its mates have flown,
The thrush's ringing note hath died;
  But glancing eye and glowing tone
Fall on her from her god, her guide.
  She knows not, asks not, what the goal,
    She only feels she moves towards bliss,
  And yields her pure unquestioning soul
    To touch and fondling kiss.

And still she haunts those woodland ways,
  Though all fond fancy finds there now
To mind of spring or summer days,
  Are sodden trunk and songless bough.
  The past sits widowed on her brow,
Homeward she wends with wintry gaze,
  To walls that house a hollow vow,
To hearth where love hath ceased to blaze;
  Watches the clammy twilight wane,
    With grief too fixed for woe or tear;
  And, with her forehead 'gainst the pane,
    Envies the dying year.

ALFRED AUSTIN.



THE SUN-DIAL.


'T is an old dial, dark with many a stain;
  In summer crowned with drifting orchard bloom,
Tricked in the autumn with the yellow rain,
  And white in winter like a marble tomb.

And round about its gray, time-eaten brow
  Lean letters speak,--a worn and shattered row:
=I am a Shade; a Shadowe too art thou:
  I marke the Time: saye, Gossip, dost thou soe?=

Here would the ring-doves linger, head to head;
  And here the snail a silver course would run,
Beating old Time; and here the peacock spread
  His gold-green glory, shutting out the sun.

The tardy shade moved forward to the noon;
  Betwixt the paths a dainty Beauty stept,
That swung a flower, and, smiling hummed a tune,--
  Before whose feet a barking spaniel leapt.

O'er her blue dress an endless blossom strayed;
  About her tendril-curls the sunlight shone;
And round her train the tiger-lilies swayed,
  Like courtiers bowing till the queen be gone.

She leaned upon the slab a little while,
  Then drew a jewelled pencil from her zone,
Scribbled a something with a frolic smile,
  Folded, inscribed, and niched it in the stone.

The shade slipped on, no swifter than the snail;
  There came a second lady to the place,
Dove-eyed, dove-robed, and something wan and pale,--
  An inner beauty shining from her face.

She, as if listless with a lonely love,
  Straying among the alleys with a book,--
Herrick or Herbert,--watched the circling dove,
  And spied the tiny letter in the nook.

Then, like to one who confirmation found
  Of some dread secret half-accounted true,--
Who knew what hearts and hands the letter bound,
  And argued loving commerce 'twixt the two,--

She bent her fair young forehead on the stone;
  The dark shade gloomed an instant on her head;
And 'twixt her taper fingers pearled and shone
  The single tear that tear-worn eyes will shed.

The shade slipped onward to the falling gloom;
  Then came a soldier gallant in her stead,
Swinging a beaver with a swaling plume,
  A ribboned love-lock rippling from his head.

Blue-eyed, frank-faced, with clear and open brow,
  Scar-seamed a little, as the women love;
So kindly fronted that you marvelled how
  The frequent sword-hilt had so frayed his glove;

Who switched at Psyche plunging in the sun;
  Uncrowned three lilies with a backward swinge;
And standing somewhat widely, like to one
  More used to "Boot and Saddle" than to cringe

As courtiers do, but gentleman withal,
  Took out the note;--held it as one who feared
The fragile thing he held would slip and fall;
  Read and re-read, pulling his tawny beard;

Kissed it, I think, and hid it in his breast;
  Laughed softly in a flattered, happy way,
Arranged the broidered baldrick on his crest,
  And sauntered past, singing a roundelay.

       *       *       *       *       *

The shade crept forward through the dying glow;
  There came no more nor dame nor cavalier;
But for a little time the brass will show
  A small gray spot,--the record of a tear.

AUSTIN DOBSON.



LOCKSLEY HALL.


Comrades, leave me here a little, while as yet 'tis early morn,--
Leave me here, and when you want me, sound upon the bugle horn.

'Tis the place, and all around it, as of old, the curlews call,
Dreary gleams about the moorland, flying over Locksley Hall:

Locksley Hall, that in the distance overlooks the sandy tracts,
And the hollow ocean-ridges roaring into cataracts.

Many a night from yonder ivied casement, ere I went to rest,
Did I look on great Orion sloping slowly to the west.

Many a night I saw the Pleiads, rising through the mellow shade,
Glitter like a swarm of fire-flies tangled in a silver braid.

Here about the beach I wandered, nourishing a youth sublime
With the fairy tales of science, and the long result of time;

When the centuries behind me like a fruitful land reposed;
When I clung to all the present for the promise that it closed;

When I dipt into the future far as human eye could see,--
Saw the vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be.

In the spring a fuller crimson comes upon the robin's breast;
In the spring the wanton lapwing gets himself another crest;

In the spring a livelier iris changes on the burnished dove;
In the spring a young man's fancy lightly turns to thoughts of love.

Then her cheek was pale and thinner than should be for one so young,
And her eyes on all my motions with a mute observance hung.

And I said, "My cousin Amy, speak, and speak the truth to me;
Trust me, cousin, all the current of my being sets to thee."

On her pallid cheek and forehead came a color and a light,
As I have seen the rosy red flushing in the northern night.

And she turned,--her bosom shaken with a sudden storm of sighs;
All the spirit deeply dawning in the dark of hazel eyes,--

Saying, "I have hid my feelings, fearing they should do me wrong;"
Saying, "Dost thou love me, cousin?" weeping, "I have loved thee long."

Love took up the glass of time, and turned it in his glowing hands;
Every moment, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden sands.

Love took up the harp of life, and smote on all the chords with might;
Smote the chord of self, that, trembling, passed in music out of sight.

Many a morning on the moorland did we hear the copses ring,
And her whisper thronged my pulses with the fulness of the spring.

Many an evening by the water did we watch the stately ships,
And our spirits rushed together at the touching of the lips.

O my cousin, shallow-hearted! O my Amy, mine no more!
O the dreary, dreary moorland! O the barren, barren shore!

Falser than all fancy fathoms, falser than all songs have sung,--
Puppet to a father's threat, and servile to a shrewish tongue!

Is it well to wish thee happy?--having known me; to decline
On a range of lower feelings and a narrower heart than mine!

Yet it shall be: thou shalt lower to his level day by day,
What is fine within thee growing coarse to sympathize with clay.

As the husband is, the wife is; thou art mated with a clown,
And the grossness of his nature will have weight to drag thee down.

He will hold thee, when his passion shall have spent its novel force,
Something better than his dog, a little dearer than his horse.

What is this? his eyes are heavy,--think not they are glazed with wine.
Go to him; it is thy duty,--kiss him; take his hand in thine.

It may be my lord is weary, that his brain is over wrought,--
Soothe him with thy finer fancies, touch him with thy lighter thought.

He will answer to the purpose, easy things to understand,--
Better thou wert dead before me, though I slew thee with my hand.

Better thou and I were lying, hidden from the heart's disgrace,
Rolled in one another's arms, and silent in a last embrace.

Cursed be the social wants that sin against the strength of youth!
Cursed be the social lies that warp us from the living truth!

Cursed be the sickly forms that err from honest nature's rule
Cursed be the gold that gilds the straitened forehead of the fool!

Well--'t is well that I should bluster!--Hadst thou less unworthy proved,
Would to God--for I had loved thee more than ever wife was loved.

Am I mad, that I should cherish that which bears but bitter fruit?
I will pluck it from my bosom, though my heart be at the root.

Never! though my mortal summers to such length of years should come
As the many-wintered crow that leads the clanging rookery home.

Where is comfort? in division of the records of the mind?
Can I part her from herself, and love her, as I knew her, kind?

I remember one that perished; sweetly did she speak and move;
Such a one do I remember, whom to look at was to love.

Can I think of her as dead, and love her for the love she bore?
No,--she never loved me truly; love is love forevermore.

Comfort? comfort scorned of devils; this is truth the poet sings,
That a sorrow's crown of sorrow is remembering happier things.

Drug thy memories, lest thou learn it, lest thy heart be put to proof,
In the dead, unhappy night, and when the rain is on the roof.

Like a dog, he hunts in dreams; and thou art staring at the wall,
Where the dying night-lamp flickers, and the shadows rise and fall.

Then a hand shall pass before thee, pointing to his drunken sleep,
To thy widowed marriage-pillows, to the tears that thou wilt weep.

Thou shalt hear the "Never, never," whispered by the phantom years,
And a song from out the distance in the ringing of thine ears;

And an eye shall vex thee, looking ancient kindness on thy pain.
Turn thee, turn thee on thy pillow; get thee to thy rest again.

Nay, but nature brings thee solace; for a tender voice will cry;
'Tis a purer life than thine, a lip to drain thy trouble dry.

Baby lips will laugh me down; my latest rival brings thee rest,--
Baby fingers, waxen touches, press me from the mother's breast.

O, the child too clothes the father with a dearness not his due.
Half is thine and half is his: it will be worthy of the two.

O, I see thee old and formal, fitted to thy petty part,
With a little hoard of maxims preaching down a daughter's heart.

"They were dangerous guides, the feelings--she herself was not exempt--
Truly, she herself had suffered"--Perish in thy self-contempt!

Overlive it--lower yet--be happy! wherefore should I care?
I myself must mix with action, lest I wither by despair.

What is that which I should turn to, lighting upon days like these?
Every door is barred with gold, and opens but to golden keys.

Every gate is thronged with suitors, all the markets overflow.
I have but an angry fancy: what is that which I should do?

I had been content to perish, falling on the foeman's ground,
When the ranks are rolled in vapor, and the winds are laid with sound.

But the jingling of the guinea helps the hurt that honor feels,
And the nations do but murmur, snarling at each other's heels.

Can I but relive in sadness? I will turn that earlier page.
Hide me from my deep emotion, O thou wondrous mother-age!

Make me feel the wild pulsation that I felt before the strife,
When I heard my days before me, and the tumult of my life;

Yearning for the large excitement that the coming years would yield,
Eager-hearted as a boy when first he leaves his father's field,

And at night along the dusky highway near and nearer drawn,
Sees in heaven the light of London flaring like a dreary dawn;

And his spirit leaps within him to be gone before him then,
Underneath the light he looks at, in among the throngs of men;

Men, my brothers, men the workers, ever reaping something new:
That which they have done but earnest of the things that they shall do:

For I dipt into the future, far as human eye could see,
Saw the vision of the world, and all the wonder that would be;

Saw the heavens fill with commerce, argosies of magic sails,
Pilots of the purple twilight, dropping down with costly bales;

Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there rained a ghastly dew
From the nations' airy navies grappling in the central blue;

Far along the world-wide whisper of the south-wind rushing warm,
With the standards of the peoples plunging through the thunder-storm;

Till the war-drum throbbed no longer, and the battle flags were furled
In the parliament of man, the federation of the world.

There the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe,
And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in universal law.

So I triumphed ere my passion sweeping through me left me dry,
Left me with a palsied heart, and left me with the jaundiced eye;

Eye, to which all order festers, all things here are out of joint.
Science moves, but slowly, slowly, creeping on from point to point:

Slowly comes a hungry people, as a lion, creeping nigher,
Glares at one that nods and winks behind a slowly dying fire.

Yet I doubt not through the ages one increasing purpose runs,
And the thoughts of men are widened with the process of the suns.

What is that to him that reaps not harvest of his youthful joys,
Though the deep heart of existence beat forever like a boy's?

Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers; and I linger on the shore
And the individual withers, and the world is more and more.

Knowledge comes, but wisdom lingers, and he bears a laden breast,
Full of sad experience moving toward the stillness of his rest.

Hark! my merry comrades call me, sounding on the bugle horn,--
They to whom my foolish passion were a target for their scorn;

Shall it not be scorn to me to harp on such a mouldered string?
I am shamed through all my nature to have loved so slight a thing.

Weakness to be wroth with weakness! woman's pleasure, woman's pain--
Nature made them blinder motions bounded in a shallower brain;

Woman is the lesser man, and all thy passions, matched with mine,
Are as moonlight unto sunlight, and as water unto wine--

Here at least, where nature sickens, nothing. Ah for some retreat
Deep in yonder shining Orient, where my life began to beat!

Where in wild Mahratta-battle fell my father, evil-starred;
I was left a trampled orphan, and a selfish uncle's ward.

Or to burst all links of habit,--there to wander far away,
On from island unto island at the gateways of the day,

Larger constellations burning, mellow moons and happy skies,
Breadths of tropic shade and palms in cluster, knots of Paradise.

Never comes the trader, never floats an European flag,--
Slides the bird o'er lustrous woodland, swings the trailer from the crag,--

Droops the heavy-blossomed bower, hangs the heavy-fruited tree,--
Summer isles of Eden lying in dark-purple spheres of sea.

There, methinks, would be enjoyment more than in this march of mind--
In the steamship, in the railway, in the thoughts that shake mankind.

There the passions, cramped no longer, shall have scope and
          breathing-space;
I will take some savage woman, she shall rear my dusky race.

Iron-jointed, supple-sinewed, they shall dive, and they shall run,
Catch the wild goat by the hair, and hurl their lances in the sun,

Whistle back the parrot's call, and leap the rainbows of the brooks,
Not with blinded eyesight poring over miserable books--

Fool, again the dream, the fancy! but I know my words are wild,
But I count the gray barbarian lower than the Christian child.

I, to herd with narrow foreheads vacant of our glorious gains,
Like a beast with lower pleasures, like a beast with lower pains!

Mated with a squalid savage,--what to me were sun or clime?
I, the heir of all the ages, in the foremost files of time,--

I, that rather held it better men should perish one by one,
Than that earth should stand at gaze like Joshua's moon in Ajalon!

Not in vain the distance beacons. Forward, forward let us range;
Let the great world spin forever down the ringing grooves of change.

Through the shadow of the globe we sweep into the younger day:
Better fifty years of Europe than a cycle of Cathay.

Mother-age, (for mine I knew not,) help me as when life begun,--
Rift the hills and roll the waters, flash the lightnings, weigh the sun,

O, I see the crescent promise of my spirit hath not set;
Ancient founts of inspiration well through all my fancy yet.

Howsoever these things be, a long farewell to Locksley Hall!
Now for me the woods may wither, now for me the roof-tree fall.

Comes a vapor from the margin, blackening over heath and holt,
Cramming all the blast before it, in its breast a thunderbolt.

Let it fall on Locksley Hall, with rain or hail, or fire or snow;
For the mighty wind arises, roaring seaward, and I go.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



SONG.


"A weary lot is thine, fair maid,
  A weary lot is thine!
To pull the thorn thy brow to braid,
  And press the rue for wine!
A lightsome eye, a soldier's mien,
  A feather of the blue,
A doublet of the Lincoln green--
  No more of me you knew,
            My love!
  No more of me you knew.

"The morn is merry June, I trow--
  The rose is budding fain;
But she shall bloom in winter snow
  Ere we two meet again."
He turned his charger as he spake,
  Upon the river shore;
He gave his bridle-rein a shake,
  Said, "Adieu for evermore,
    My love!
  And adieu for evermore."

SIR WALTER SCOTT.



AULD ROBIN GRAY.


When the sheep are in the fauld and the kye a' at hame,
When a' the weary world to sleep are gane,
The waes o' my heart fa' in showers frae my e'e,
While my gudeman lies sound by me.

Young Jamie lo'ed me weel, and sought me for his bride;
But saving a crown, he had naething else beside.
To mak' the crown a pound, my Jamie gaed to sea;
And the crown and the pound, they were baith for me!

He hadna been awa' a week but only twa,
When my mither she fell sick, and the cow was stown awa;
My father brak his arm--my Jamie at the sea--
And Auld Robin Gray came a-courtin' me.

My father couldna work,--my mither couldna spin;
I toiled day and night, but their bread I couldna win;
And Rob maintained them baith, and, wi' tears in his e'e,
Said, "Jennie for their sakes, will you marry me?"

My heart it said na, for I looked for Jamie back;
But hard blew the winds, and his ship was a wrack;
His ship was a wrack! Why didna Jamie dee?
Or why was I spared to cry, Wae is me!

My father argued sair--my mither didna speak,
But she looked in my face till my heart was like to break;
They gied him my hand, but my heart was in the sea;
And so Auld Robin Gray, he was gudeman to me.

I hadna been his wife, a week but only four,
When, mournfu' as I sat on the stane at the door,
I saw my Jamie's ghaist--I couldna think it he,
Till he said, "I'm come hame, love, for to marry thee!"

O sair, sair did we greet, and mickle did we say:
Ae kiss we took--nae mair--I bad him gang away.
I wish that I were dead, but I'm no like to dee,
And why do I live to say, Wae is me!

I gang like a ghaist, and I carena to spin;
I darena think o' Jamie, for that wad be a sin.
But I will do my best a gude wife aye to be,
For Auld Robin Gray, he is kind unto me.

LADY ANNE BARNARD.



TO A PORTRAIT.


A pensive photograph
  Watches me from the shelf--
Ghost of old love, and half
  Ghost of myself!

How the dear waiting eyes
  Watch me and love me yet--
Sad home of memories,
  Her waiting eyes!

Ghost of old love, wronged ghost,
  Return: though all the pain
Of all once loved, long lost,
  Come back again.

Forget not, but forgive!
  Alas, too late I cry.
We are two ghosts that had their chance to live,
  And lost it, she and I.

ARTHUR SYMONS.



MAUD MULLER.


Maud Muller, on a summer's day,
Raked the meadow sweet with hay.

Beneath her torn hat glowed the wealth
Of simple beauty and rustic health.

Singing, she wrought, and her merry glee
The mock-bird echoed from his tree.

But, when she glanced to the far-off town,
White from its hill-slope looking down,

The sweet song died, and a vague unrest
And a nameless longing filled her breast,--

A wish, that she hardly dared to own,
For something better than she had known.

The Judge rode slowly down the lane,
Smoothing his horse's chestnut mane.

He drew his bridle in the shade
Of the apple-trees, to greet the maid,

And ask a draught from the spring that flowed
Through the meadow, across the road.

She stooped where the cool spring bubbled up,
And filled for him her small tin cup,

And blushed as she gave it, looking down
On her feet so bare, and her tattered gown.

"Thanks!" said the Judge, "a sweeter draught
From a fairer hand was never quaffed."

He spoke of the grass and flowers and trees,
Of the singing birds and the humming bees;

Then talked of the haying, and wondered whether
The cloud in the west would bring foul weather.

And Maud forgot her brier-torn gown,
And her graceful ankles, bare and brown,

And listened, while a pleased surprise
Looked from her long-lashed hazel eyes.

At last, like one who for delay
Seeks a vain excuse, he rode away.

Maud Muller looked and sighed: "Ah me!
That I the Judge's bride might be!

"He would dress me up in silks so fine,
And praise and toast me at his wine.

"My father should wear a broadcloth coat,
My brother should sail a painted boat.

"I 'd dress my mother so grand and gay,
And the baby should have a new toy each day.

"And I'd feed the hungry and clothe the poor,
And all should bless me who left our door."

The Judge looked back as he climbed the hill,
And saw Maud Muller standing still:

"A form more fair, a face more sweet,
Ne'er hath it been my lot to meet.

"And her modest answer and graceful air
Show her wise and good as she is fair.

"Would she were mine, and I to-day,
Like her, a harvester of hay.

"No doubtful balance of rights and wrongs,
Nor weary lawyers with endless tongues,

"But low of cattle, and song of birds,
And health, and quiet, and loving words."

But he thought of his sister, proud and cold,
And his mother, vain of her rank and gold.

So, closing his heart, the Judge rode on,
And Maud was left in the field alone.

But the lawyers smiled that afternoon,
When he hummed in court an old love tune;

And the young girl mused beside the well,
Till the rain on the unraked clover fell.

He wedded a wife of richest dower,
Who lived for fashion, as he for power.

Yet oft, in his marble hearth's bright glow,
He watched a picture come and go;

And sweet Maud Muller's hazel eyes
Looked out in their innocent surprise.

Oft, when the wine in his glass was red,
He longed for the wayside well instead,

And closed his eyes on his garnished rooms,
To dream of meadows and clover blooms;

And the proud man sighed with a secret pain,
"Ah, that I were free again!

"Free as when I rode that day
Where the barefoot maiden raked the hay."

She wedded a man unlearned and poor,
And many children played round her door.

But care and sorrow, and child-birth pain,
Left their traces on heart and brain.

And oft, when the summer sun shone hot
On the new-mown hay in the meadow lot,

And she heard the little spring brook fall
Over the roadside, through the wall,

In the shade of the apple-tree again
She saw a rider draw his rein,

And, gazing down with a timid grace,
She felt his pleased eyes read her face.

Sometimes her narrow kitchen walls
Stretched away into stately halls;

The weary wheel to a spinnet turned,
The tallow candle an astral burned;

And for him who sat by the chimney lug,
Dozing and grumbling o'er pipe and mug,

A manly form at her side she saw,
And joy was duty and love was law.

Then she took up her burden of life again,
Saying only, "It might have been."

Alas for maiden, alas for judge,
For rich repiner and household drudge!

God pity them both! and pity us all,
Who vainly the dreams of youth recall;

For of all sad words of tongue or pen,
The saddest are these: "It might have been!"

Ah, well! for us all some sweet hope lies
Deeply buried from human eyes;

And, in the hereafter, angels may
Roll the stone from its grave away!

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.



THE PALM AND THE PINE.


Beneath an Indian palm a girl
  Of other blood reposes;
Her cheek is clear and pale as pearl
  Amid that wild of roses.

Beside a northern pine a boy
  Is leaning fancy-bound.
Nor listens where with noisy joy
  Awaits the impatient hound.

Cool grows the sick and feverish calm,
  Relaxed the frosty twine.--
The pine-tree dreameth of the palm,
  The palm-tree of the pine.

As soon shall nature interlace
  Those dimly-visioned boughs,
As these young lovers face to face
  Renew their early vows.

From the German of HEINRICH HEINE.
Translation of RICHARD MONCKTON MILNES, LORD HOUGHTON.



CUMNOR HALL.

     [SAID TO HAVE BEEN THE SUGGESTIVE ORIGIN OF SCOTT'S
     "KENILWORTH."]


The dews of summer night did fall;
  The moon, sweet regent of the sky,
Silvered the walls of Cumnor Hall,
  And many an oak that grew thereby.

Now naught was heard beneath the skies,
  The sounds of busy life were still,
Save an unhappy lady's sighs,
  That issued from that lonely pile.

"Leicester," she cried, "is this thy love
  That thou so oft hast sworn to me,
To leave me in this lonely grove,
  Immured in shameful privity?

"No more thou com'st with lover's speed,
  Thy once beloved bride to see;
But be she alive, or be she dead,
  I fear, stern Earl, 's the same to thee.

"Not so the usage I received
  When happy in my father's hall;
No faithless husband then me grieved,
  No chilling fears did me appal.

"I rose up with the cheerful morn,
  No lark more blithe, no flower more gay
And like the bird that haunts the thorn,
  So merrily sung the livelong day.

"If that my beauty is but small,
  Among court ladies all despised,
Why didst thou rend it from that hall,
  Where, scornful Earl, it well was prized?

"And when you first to me made suit,
  How fair I was, you oft would say!
And proud of conquest, plucked the fruit,
  Then left the blossom to decay.

"Yes! now neglected and despised,
  The rose is pale, the lily's dead;
But he, that once their charms so prized,
  Is sure the cause those charms are fled.

"For know, when sick'ning grief doth prey,
  And tender love's repaid with scorn,
The sweetest beauty will decay,--
  What floweret can endure the storm?

"At court, I'm told, is beauty's throne,
  Where every lady's passing rare,
That Eastern flowers, that shame the sun,
  Are not so glowing, not so fair.

"Then, Earl, why didst thou leave the beds
  Where roses and where lilies vie,
To seek a primrose, whose pale shades
  Must sicken when those gauds are by?

"'Mong rural beauties I was one,
  Among the fields wild flowers are fair;
Some country swain might me have won,
  And thought my beauty passing rare.

"But, Leicester, (or I much am wrong,)
  Or 't is not beauty lures thy vows;
Rather ambition's gilded crown
  Makes thee forget thy humble spouse.

"Then, Leicester, why, again I plead,
  (The injured surely may repine,)--
Why didst thou wed a country maid,
  When some fair princess might be thine?

"Why didst thou praise my humble charms,
  And, oh! then leave them to decay?
Why didst thou win me to thy arms,
  Then leave to mourn the livelong day?

"The village maidens of the plain
  Salute me lowly as they go;
Envious they mark my silken train,
  Nor think a Countess can have woe.

"The simple nymphs! they little know
  How far more happy 's their estate;
To smile for joy than sigh for woe
  To be content--than to be great.

"How far less blest am I than them
  Daily to pine and waste with care!
Like the poor plant, that, from its stem
  Divided, feels the chilling air.

"Nor, cruel Earl! can I enjoy
  The humble charms of solitude;
Your minions proud my peace destroy,
  By sullen frowns or pratings rude.

"Last night, as sad I chanced to stray,
  The village death-bell smote my ear;
They winked aside, and seemed to say,
  'Countess, prepare, thy end is near.'

"And now, while happy peasants sleep,
  Here I sit lonely and forlorn;
No one to soothe me as I weep,
  Save Philomel on yonder thorn.

"My spirits flag--my hopes decay--
  Still that dread death-bell smites my ear,
And many a boding seems to say,
  'Countess, prepare, thy end is near!'"

Thus sore and sad that lady grieved,
  In Cumnor Hall so lone and drear,
And many a heartfelt sigh she heaved,
  And let fall many a bitter tear.

And ere the dawn of day appeared,
  In Cumnor Hall, so lone and drear,
Full many a piercing scream was heard,
  And many a cry of mortal fear.

The death-bell thrice was heard to ring,
  An aerial voice was heard to call,
And thrice the raven flapped its wing
  Around the towers of Cumnor Hall.

The mastiff bowled at village door,
  The oaks were shattered on the green;
Woe was the hour, for nevermore
  That hapless Countess e'er was seen.

And in that manor now no more
  Is cheerful feast and sprightly ball;
For ever since that dreary hour
  Have spirits haunted Cumnor Hall.

The village maids, with fearful glance,
  Avoid the ancient moss-grown wall,
Nor ever lead the merry dance,
  Among the groves of Cumnor Hall.

Full many a traveller oft hath sighed,
  And pensive wept the Countess' fall,
As wandering onward they've espied
  The haunted towers of Cumnor Hall.

WILLIAM JULIUS MICKLE.



WALY, WALY.


O waly, waly, up the bank,
  O waly, waly, doun the brae,
And waly, waly, yon burn-side,
  Where I and my love were wont to gae!
I leaned my back unto an aik,
  I thocht it was a trustie tree,
But first it bowed and syne it brak',--
  Sae my true love did lichtlie me.

O waly, waly, but love be bonnie
  A little time while it is new!
But when it's auld it waxeth cauld,
  And fadeth awa' like the morning dew.
O wherefore should I busk my heid.
  Or wherefore should I kame my hair?
For my true love has me forsook,
  And says he'll never lo'e me mair.

Noo Arthur's Seat sall be my bed,
  The sheets sall ne'er be pressed by me;
Saint Anton's well sall be my drink;
  Since my true love's forsaken me.
Martinmas wind, when wilt thou blaw,
  And shake the green leaves off the tree?
O gentle death, when wilt thou come?
  For of my life I am wearie.

'Tis not the frost that freezes fell,
  Nor blawing snaw's inclemencie,
'Tis not sic cauld that makes me cry;
  But my love's heart grown cauld to me.
When we cam' in by Glasgow toun,
  We were a comely sicht to see;
My love was clad in the black velvet,
  An' I mysel' in cramasie.

But had I wist before I kissed
  That love had been so ill to win,
I 'd locked my heart in a case o' goud,
  And pinn'd it wi' a siller pin.
Oh, oh! if my young babe were born,
  And set upon the nurse's knee;
And I mysel' were dead and gane,
  And the green grass growing over me!

ANONYMOUS.



LADY ANN BOTHWELL'S LAMENT.

A SCOTTISH SONG.


Balow, my babe, ly stil and sleipe!
It grieves me sair to see thee weipe;
If thoust be silent, Ise be glad,
Thy maining maks my heart ful sad.
Balow, my boy, thy mither's joy!
Thy father breides me great annoy.
    _Balow, my 'babe, ly stil and sleipe!
    It grieves me sair to see thee weipe._

When he began to court my luve,
And with his sugred words to muve,
His faynings fals and flattering cheire
To me that time did not appeire:
But now I see, most cruell hee,
Cares neither for my babe nor mee.
    _Balow_, etc.

Ly stil, my darlinge, sleipe awhile,
And when thou wakest sweitly smile:
But smile not, as thy father did,
To cozen maids; nay, God forbid!
But yette I feire, thou wilt gae neire,
Thy fatheris hart and face to beire.
    _Balow_, etc.

I cannae chuse, but ever will
Be luving to thy father stil:
Whaireir he gae, whaireir he ryde,
My luve with him maun stil abyde:
In weil or wae, whaireir he gae,
Mine hart can neir depart him frae.
    _Balow_, etc.

But doe not, doe not, prettie mine,
To faynings fals thine hart incline;
Be loyal to thy luver trew,
And nevir change hir for a new;
If gude or faire, of hir have care,
For womens banning's wonderous sair.
    _Balow_, etc.

Bairne, sin thy cruel father is gane,
Thy winsome smiles maun eise my paine;
My babe and I 'll together live,
He'll comfort me when cares doe grieve;
My babe and I right saft will ly,
And quite forgeit man's cruelty.
    _Balow_, etc.

Fareweil, fareweil, thou falsest youth
That ever kist a woman's mouth!
I wish all maids be warned by mee,
Nevir to trust man's curtesy;
For if we doe but chance to bow,
They'll use us then they care not how.
    _Balow, my 'babe, ly stil and sleipe!
    It grieves me sair to see thee weipe._

ANONYMOUS.



MY HEID IS LIKE TO REND, WILLIE.


My heid is like to rend, Willie,
  My heart is like to break;
I'm wearin' aff my feet, Willie,
  I'm dyin' for your sake!
O, say ye'll think on me, Willie,
  Your hand on my briest-bane,--
O, say ye'll think of me, Willie,
  When I am deid and gane!

It's vain to comfort me, Willie,
  Sair grief maun ha'e its will;
But let me rest upon your briest
  To sab and greet my fill.
Let me sit on your knee, Willie,
  Let me shed by your hair,
And look into the face, Willie,
  I never sall see mair!

I'm sittin' on your knee, Willie,
  For the last time in my life,--
A puir heart-broken thing, Willie,
  A mither, yet nae wife.
Ay, press your hand upon my heart,
  And press it mair and mair,
Or it will burst the silken twine,
  Sae strang is its despair.

O, wae's me for the hour, Willie,
  When we thegither met,--
O, wae's me for the time, Willie,
  That our first tryst was set!
O, wae's me for the loanin' green
  Where we were wont to gae,--
And wae's me for the destinie
  That gart me luve thee sae!

O, dinna mind my words, Willie,
  I downa seek to blame;
But O, it's hard to live, Willie,
  And dree a warld's shame!
Het tears are hailin' ower our cheek,
  And hailin' ower your chin:
Why weep ye sae for worthlessness,
  For sorrow, and for sin?

I'm weary o' this warld, Willie,
  And sick wi' a' I see,
I canna live as I ha'e lived,
  Or be as I should be.
But fauld unto your heart, Willie,
  The heart that still is thine,
And kiss ance mair the white, white cheek
  Ye said was red langsyne.

A stoun' gaes through my heid, Willie,
  A sair stoun' through my heart;
O, haud me up and let me kiss
  Thy brow ere we twa pairt.
Anither, and anither yet!--
  How fast my life-strings break!--
Fareweel! fareweel! through yon kirk-yard
  Step lichtly for my sake!

The lav'rock in the lift, Willie,
  That lifts far ower our heid,
Will sing the morn as merrilie
  Abune the clay-cauld deid;
And this green turf we're sittin' on,
  Wi' dew-draps shimmerin' sheen,
Will hap the heart that luvit thee
  As warld has seldom seen.

But O, remember me, Willie,
  On land where'er ye be;
And O, think on the leal, leal heart,
  That ne'er luvit ane but thee!
And O, think on the cauld, cauld mools
  That file my yellow hair,
That kiss the cheek, and kiss the chin
  Ye never sall kiss mair!

WILLIAM MOTHERWELL.



ASHES OF ROSES.


Soft on the sunset sky
  Bright daylight closes,
Leaving, when light doth die,
Pale hues that mingling lie,--
  Ashes of roses.

When love's warm sun is set,
  Love's brightness closes;
Eyes with hot tears are wet,
In hearts there linger yet
  Ashes of roses.

ELAINE GOODALE EASTMAN.



A WOMAN'S LOVE.


A sentinel angel, sitting high in glory,
Heard this shrill wail ring out from Purgatory:
"Have mercy, mighty angel, hear my story!

"I loved,--and, blind with passionate love, I fell.
Love brought me down to death, and death to Hell;
For God is just, and death for sin is well.

"I do not rage against his high decree,
Nor for myself do ask that grace shall be;
But for my love on earth who mourns for me.

"Great Spirit! Let me see my love again
And comfort him one hour, and I were fain
To pay a thousand years of fire and pain."

Then said the pitying angel, "Nay, repent
That wild vow! Look, the dial-finger's bent
Down to the last hour of thy punishment!"

But still she wailed, "I pray thee, let me go!
I cannot rise to peace and leave him so.
O, let me soothe him in his bitter woe!"

The brazen gates ground sullenly ajar,
And upwards, joyous, like a rising star,
She rose and vanished in the ether far.

But soon adown the dying sunset sailing,
And like a wounded bird her pinions trailing,
She fluttered back, with broken-hearted wailing.

She sobbed, "I found him by the summer sea
Reclined, his head upon a maiden's knee,--
She curled his hair and kissed him. Woe is me!"

She wept, "Now let my punishment begin!
I have been fond and foolish. Let me in
To expiate my sorrow and my sin."

The angel answered, "Nay, sad soul, go higher!
To be deceived in your true heart's desire
Was bitterer than a thousand years of fire!"

JOHN HAY.



THE SHADOW ROSE.


A noisette on my garden path
  An ever-swaying shadow throws;
But if I pluck it strolling by,
  I pluck the shadow with the rose.

Just near enough my heart you stood
  To shadow it,--but was it fair
In him, who plucked and bore you off,
  To leave your shadow lingering there?

ROBERT CAMERON ROGERS.



HAS SUMMER COME WITHOUT THE ROSE?


Has summer come without the rose,
  Or left the bird behind?
Is the blue changed above thee,
  O world! or am I blind?
Will you change every flower that grows,
  Or only change this spot,
Where she who said, I love thee,
  Now says, I love thee not?

The skies seemed true above thee,
  The rose true on the tree;
The bird seemed true the summer through,
  But all proved false to me.
World, is there one good thing in you,
  Life, love, or death--or what?
Since lips that sang, I love thee,
  Have said, I love thee not?

I think the sun's kiss will scarce fall
  Into one flower's gold cup;
I think the bird will miss me,
  And give the summer up.
O sweet place, desolate in tall
  Wild grass, have you forgot
How her lips loved to kiss me,
  Now that they kiss me not?

Be false or fair above me;
  Come back with any face,
Summer!--do I care what you do?
  You cannot change one place,--
The grass, the leaves, the earth, the dew,
  The grave I make the spot,--
Here, where she used to love me,
  Here, where she loves me not.

ARTHUR O'SHAUGHNESSY.



THE DIRTY OLD MAN.

A LAY OF LEADENHALL.

[A singular man, named Nathaniel Bentley, for many years kept a large
hardware-shop in Leadenhall Street, London. He was best know as Dirty
Dick (Dick, for alliteration's sake, probably), and his place of
business as the Dirty Warehouse. He died about the year 1809. These
verses accord with the accounts respecting himself and his house.]


In a dirty old house lived a Dirty Old Man;
Soap, towels, or brushes were not in his plan.
For forty long years, as the neighbors declared,
His house never once had been cleaned or repaired.

'T was a scandal and shame to the business-like street,
One terrible blot in a ledger so neat:
The shop full of hardware, but black as a hearse,
And the rest of the mansion a thousand times worse.

Outside, the old plaster, all spatter and stain,
Looked spotty in sunshine and streaky in rain;
The window-sills sprouted with mildewy grass,
And the panes from being broken were known to be glass.

On the rickety sign-board no learning could spell
The merchant who sold, or the goods he'd to sell;
But for house and for man a new title took growth,
Like a fungus,--the Dirt gave its name to them both.

Within, there were carpets and cushions of dust,
The wood was half rot, and the metal half rust.
Old curtains, half cobwebs, hung grimly aloof;
'T was a Spiders' Elysium from cellar to roof.

There, king of the spiders, the Dirty Old Man
Lives busy and dirty as ever he can;
With dirt on his fingers and dirt on his face,
For the Dirty Old Man thinks the dirt no disgrace.

From his wig to his shoes, from his coat to his shirt,
His clothes are a proverb, a marvel of dirt;
The dirt is pervading, unfading, exceeding,--
Yet the Dirty Old Man has both learning and breeding.

Fine dames from their carriages, noble and fair,
Have entered his shop, less to buy than to stare;
And have afterwards said, though the dirt was so frightful,
The Dirty Man's manners were truly delightful.

Upstairs might they venture, in dirt and in gloom,
To peep at the door of the wonderful room
Such stories are told about, none of them true!--
The keyhole itself has no mortal seen through.

That room,--forty years since, folk settled and decked it.
The luncheon's prepared, and the guests are expected,
The handsome young host he is gallant and gay,
For his love and her friends will be with him today.

With solid and dainty the table is drest,
The wine beams its brightest, the flowers bloom their best;
Yet the host need not smile, and no guests will appear,
For his sweetheart is dead, as he shortly shall hear.

Full forty years since turned the key in that door.
'T is a room deaf and dumb mid the city's uproar.
The guests, for whose joyance that table was spread,
May now enter as ghosts, for they're every one dead.

Through a chink in the shutter dim lights come and go;
The seats are in order, the dishes a-row:
But the luncheon was wealth to the rat and the mouse
Whose descendants have long left the Dirty Old House.

Cup and platter are masked in thick layers of dust;
The flowers fallen to powder, the wine swathed in crust;
A nosegay was laid before one special chair,
And the faded blue ribbon that bound it lies there.

The old man has played out his part in the scene.
Wherever he now is, I hope he's more clean.
Yet give we a thought free of scoffing or ban
To that Dirty Old House and that Dirty Old Man.

WILLIAM ALLINGHAM.



HOME, WOUNDED.


Wheel me into the sunshine,
Wheel me into the shadow.
There must be leaves on the woodbine,
Is the kingcup crowned in the meadow?

Wheel me down to the meadow,
Down to the little river,
In sun or in shadow
I shall not dazzle or shiver,
I shall be happy anywhere,
Every breath of the morning air
Makes me throb and quiver.

Stay wherever you will,
By the mount or under the hill,
Or down by the little river:
Stay as long as you please,
Give me only a bud from the trees,
Or a blade of grass in morning dew,
Or a cloudy violet clearing to blue,
I could look on it forever.

Wheel, wheel through the sunshine,
Wheel, wheel through the shadow;
There must be odors round the pine,
There must be balm of breathing kine,
Somewhere down in the meadow.
Must I choose? Then anchor me there
Beyond the beckoning poplars, where
The larch is snooding her flowery hair
With wreaths of morning shadow.

Among the thickest hazels of the brake
Perchance some nightingale doth shake
His feathers, and the air is full of song;
In those old days when I was young and strong,
He used to sing on yonder garden tree,
Beside the nursery.
Ah, I remember how I loved to wake,
And find him singing on the self-same bough
(I know it even now)
Where, since the flit of bat,
In ceaseless voice he sat,
Trying the spring night over, like a tune,
Beneath the vernal moon;
And while I listed long,
Day rose, and still he sang,
And all his stanchless song,
As something falling unaware,
Fell out of the tall trees he sang among,
Fell ringing down the ringing morn, and rang,--
Rang like a golden jewel down a golden stair.

       *       *       *       *       *

My soul lies out like a basking hound,--
A hound that dreams and dozes;
Along my life my length I lay,
I fill to-morrow and yesterday,
I am warm with the suns that have long since set,
I am warm with the summers that are not yet,
And like one who dreams and dozes
Softly afloat on a sunny sea,
Two worlds are whispering over me,
And there blows a wind of roses
From the backward shore to the shore before,
From the shore before to the backward shore,
And like two clouds that meet and pour
Each through each, till core in core
A single self reposes,
The nevermore with the evermore
Above me mingles and closes;
As my soul lies out like the basking hound,
And wherever it lies seems happy ground,
And when, awakened by some sweet sound,
A dreamy eye uncloses,
I see a blooming world around,
And I lie amid primroses,--Years
of sweet primroses,
Springs of fresh primroses,
Springs to be, and springs for me
Of distant dim primroses.

O, to lie a-dream, a-dream,
To feel I may dream and to know you deem
My work is done forever,
And the palpitating fever,
That gains and loses, loses and gains,
And beats the hurrying blood on the brunt of a thousand pains,
Cooled at once by that blood-let
Upon the parapet;
And all the tedious tasked toil of the difficult long endeavor
Solved and quit by no more fine
Than these limbs of mine,
Spanned and measured once for all
By that right-hand I lost,
Bought up at so light a cost
As one bloody fall
On the soldier's bed,
And three days on the ruined wall
Among the thirstless dead.

O, to think my name is crost
From duty's muster-roll;
That I may slumber though the clarion call,
And live the joy of an embodied soul
Free as a liberated ghost.
O, to feel a life of deed
Was emptied out to feed
That fire of pain that burned so brief awhile,--
That fire from which I come, as the dead come
Forth from the irreparable tomb,
Or as a martyr on his funeral pile
Heaps up the burdens other men do bear
Through years of segregated care,
And takes the total load
Upon his shoulders broad,
And steps from earth to God.

O, to think, through good or ill,
Whatever I am you'll love me still;
O, to think, though dull I be,
You that are so grand and free,
You that are so bright and gay,
Will pause to hear me when I will,
As though my head were gray;
A single self reposes,
The nevermore with the evermore
Above me mingles and closes;
As my soul lies out like the basking hound,
And wherever it lies seems happy ground,
And when, awakened by some sweet sound,
A dreamy eye uncloses,
I see a blooming world around,
And I lie amid primroses,--
Years of sweet primroses,
Springs of fresh primroses.
Springs to be, and springs for me
Of distant dim primroses.

O, to lie a-dream, a-dream,
To feel I may dream and to know you deem
My work is done forever,
And the palpitating fever,
That gains and loses, loses and gains,
And she,
Perhaps, O even she
May look as she looked when I knew her
In those old days of childish sooth,
Ere my boyhood dared to woo her.
I will not seek nor sue her,
For I'm neither fonder nor truer
Than when she slighted my lovelorn youth,
My giftless, graceless, guinealess truth,
And I only lived to rue her.
But I'll never love another,
And, in spite of her lovers and lands,
She shall love me yet, my brother!

As a child that holds by his mother,
While his mother speaks his praises,
Holds with eager hands,
And ruddy and silent stands
In the ruddy and silent daisies,
And hears her bless her boy,
And lifts a wondering joy,
So I'll not seek nor sue her,
But I'll leave my glory to woo her,
And I'll stand like a child beside,
And from behind the purple pride
I'll lift my eyes unto her,
And I shall not be denied.
And you will love her, brother dear,
And perhaps next year you'll bring me here
All through the balmy April tide,
And she will trip like spring by my side,
And be all the birds to my ear.

And here all three we'll sit in the sun,
And see the Aprils one by one,
Primrosed Aprils on and on,
Till the floating prospect closes
In golden glimmers that rise and rise,
And perhaps are gleams of Paradise,
And perhaps too far for mortal eyes,
New springs of fresh primroses,
Springs of earth's primroses,
Springs to be, and springs for me
Of distant dim primroses.

SYDNEY DOBELL.



DIVIDED.


I.

An empty sky, a world of heather,
  Purple of foxglove, yellow of broom:
We two among them wading together,
  Shaking out honey, treading perfume.

Crowds of bees are giddy with clover,
  Crowds of grasshoppers skip at our feet:
Crowds of larks at their matins hang over,
  Thanking the Lord for a life so sweet.

Flusheth the rise with her purple favor,
  Gloweth the cleft with her golden ring,
'Twixt the two brown butterflies waver,
  Lightly settle, and sleepily swing.

We two walk till the purple dieth,
  And short dry grass under foot is brown,
But one little streak at a distance lieth
  Green, like a ribbon, to prank the down.


II.

Over the grass we stepped unto it,
  And God, He knoweth how blithe we were!
Never a voice to bid us eschew it;
  Hey the green ribbon that showed so fair!

Hey the green ribbon! we kneeled beside it,
  We parted the grasses dewy and sheen:
Drop over drop there filtered and slided
  A tiny bright beck that trickled between.

Tinkle, tinkle, sweetly it sung to us,
  Light was our talk as of faery bells--
Faery wedding-bells faintly rung to us,
  Down in their fortunate parallels.

Hand in hand, while the sun peered over,
  We lapped the grass on that youngling spring,
Swept back its rushes, smoothed its clover,
  And said, "Let us follow it westering."


III.

A dappled sky, a world of meadows;
  Circling above us the black rooks fly,
'Forward, backward: lo, their dark shadows
  Flit on the blossoming tapestry--

Flit on the beck--for her long grass parteth,
  As hair from a maid's bright eyes blown back;
And lo, the sun like a lover darteth
  His flattering smile on her wayward track.

Sing on! we sing in the glorious weather,
  Till one steps over the tiny strand,
So narrow, in sooth, that still together
  On either brink we go hand in hand.

The beck grows wider, the hands must sever,
  On either margin, our songs all done,
We move apart, while she singeth ever,
  Taking the course of the stooping sun.

He prays, "Come over"--I may not follow;
  I cry, "Return"--but he cannot come:
We speak, we laugh, but with voices hollow;
  Our hands are hanging, our hearts are numb.


IV.

A breathing sigh--a sigh for answer;
  A little talking of outward things:
The careless beck is a merry dancer,
  Keeping sweet time to the air she sings.

A little pain when the beck grows wider--
  "Cross to me now, for her wavelets swell:"
"I may not cross" and the voice beside her
  Faintly reacheth, though heeded well.

No backward path; ah! no returning:
  No second crossing that ripple's flow:
"Come to me now, for the west is burning:
  Come ere it darkens."--"Ah, no! ah, no!"

Then cries of pain, and arms outreaching--
  The beck grows wider and swift and deep;
Passionate words as of one beseeching--
  The loud beck drowns them: we walk and weep.


V.

A yellow moon in splendor drooping,
  A tired queen with her state oppressed,
Low by rushes and sword-grass stooping,
  Lies she soft on the waves at rest.

The desert heavens have felt her sadness;
  Her earth will weep her some dewy tears;
The wild beck ends her tune of gladness,
  And goeth stilly as soul that fears.

We two walk on in our grassy places,
  On either marge of the moonlit flood,
With the moon's own sadness in our faces,
  Where joy is withered, blossom and bud.


VI.

A shady freshness, chafers whirring,
  A little piping of leaf-hid birds;
A flutter of wings, a fitful stirring,
  A cloud to the eastward snowy as curds.

Bare grassy slopes, where the kids are tethered,
  Bound valleys like nests all ferny-lined;
Round hills, with fluttering tree-tops feathered,
  Swell high in their freckled robes behind.

A rose-flush tender, a thrill, a quiver,
  When golden gleams to the tree-tops glide;
A flashing edge for the milk-white river,
  The beck, a river--with still sleek tide.

Broad and white, and polished as silver,
  On she goes under fruit-laden trees;
Sunk in leafage cooeth the culver,
  And 'plaineth of love's disloyalties.

Glitters the dew, and shines the river;
  Up comes the lily and dries her bell;
But two are walking apart forever,
  And wave their hands for a mute farewell.


VII.

A braver swell, a swifter sliding;
  The river hasteth, her banks recede;
Wing-like sails on her bosom gliding
  Bear down the lily, and drown the reed.

Stately prows are rising and bowing--
  (Shouts of mariners winnow the air)--
And level sands for banks endowing
  The tiny green ribbon that showed so fair.

While, O my heart! as white sails shiver,
  And crowds are passing, and banks stretch wide,
How hard to follow, with lips that quiver,
  That moving speck on the far-off side!

Farther, farther--I see it--know it--
  My eyes brim over, it melts away:
Only my heart to my heart shall show it,
  As I walk desolate day by day.


VIII.

And yet I know past all doubting, truly,--
  A knowledge greater than grief can dim--
I know, as he loved, he will love me duly--
  Yea, better--e'en better than I love him:

And as I walk by the vast calm river,
  The awful river so dread to see,
I say, "Thy breadth and thy depth forever
  Are bridged by his thoughts that cross to me."

JEAN INGELOW.



TO DIANE DE POITIERS.


Farewell! since vain is all my care,
  Far, in some desert rude,
I'll hide my weakness, my despair:
  And, 'midst my solitude,
I'll pray, that, should another move thee,
He may as fondly, truly love thee.

Adieu, bright eyes, that were my heaven!
  Adieu, soft cheek, where summer blooms!
Adieu, fair form, earth's pattern given,
  Which Love inhabits and illumes!
Your rays have fallen but coldly on me:
One far less fond, perchance, had won ye!

From the French of CLEMENT MAROT.
Translation of LOUISE STUART COSTELLO.



THE SPINNER.


The spinner twisted her slender thread
As she sat and spun:
"The earth and the heavens are mine," she said,
"And the moon and sun;
Into my web the sunlight goes,
And the breath of May,
And the crimson life of the new-blown rose
That was born to-day."

The spinner sang in the hush of noon
And her song was low:
"Ah, morning, you pass away too soon,
You are swift to go.
My heart o'erflows like a brimming cup
With its hopes and fears.
Love, come and drink the sweetness up
Ere it turn to tears."

The spinner looked at the falling sun:
"Is it time to rest?
My hands are weary,--my work is done,
I have wrought my best;
I have spun and woven with patient eyes
And with fingers fleet.
Lo! where the toil of a lifetime lies
In a winding-sheet!"

MARY AINGE DE VERE (_Madeline Bridges_).



TAKE, O, TAKE THOSE LIPS AWAY.[1]


Take, O, take those lips away,
That so sweetly were forsworn;
And those eyes, like break of day,
Lights that do mislead the morn;
But my kisses bring again,
Seals of love, but sealed in vain.

Hide, O, hide those hills of snow
Which thy frozen bosom bears,
On whose tops the pinks that grow
Are yet of those that April wears!
But first set my poor heart free,

Bound in those icy chains by thee.

SHAKESPEARE and JOHN FLETCHER.

    [1] The first stanza of this song appears in Shakespeare's
    "Measure for Measure," Activ. Sc. I.; the same, with the
    second, stanza added, is found in Beaumont and Fletcher's
    "Bloody Brother," Act v. Sc. 2.



WOMAN'S INCONSTANCY.


I loved thee once, I'll love no more,
Thine be the grief as is the blame;
Thou art not what thou wast before,
What reason I should be the same?
He that can love unloved again,
Hath better store of love than brain:
God sends me love my debts to pay,
While unthrifts fool their love away.

Nothing could have my love o'erthrown,
If thou hadst still continued mine;
Yea, if thou hadst remained thy own,
I might perchance have yet been thine.
But thou thy freedom didst recall,
That if thou might elsewhere inthrall;
And then how could I but disdain
A captive's captive to remain?

When new desires had conquered thee,
And changed the object of thy will,
It had been lethargy in me,
Not constancy, to love thee still.
Yea, it had been a sin to go
And prostitute affection so,
Since we are taught no prayers to say
To such as must to others pray.

Yet do thou glory in thy choice.
Thy choice of his good fortune boast;
I 'll neither grieve nor yet rejoice,
To see him gain what I have lost;
The height of my disdain shall be,
To laugh at him, to blush for thee;
To love thee still, but go no more
A begging to a beggar's door.

SIR ROBERT AYTON.



TIME'S REVENGE.


She, who but late in beauty's flower was seen,
Proud of her auburn curls and noble mien--
Who froze my hopes and triumphed in my fears,
Now sheds her graces in the waste of years.
Changed to unlovely is that breast of snow,
And dimmed her eye, and wrinkled is her brow;
And querulous the voice by time repressed,
Whose artless music stole me from my rest.
Age gives redress to love; and silvery hair
And earlier wrinkles brand the haughty fair.

From the Greek of AGATHIAS.
Translation of ROBERT BLAND.



THE DREAM.


Our life is twofold; sleep hath its own world,
A boundary between the things misnamed
Death and existence: sleep hath its own world,
And a wide realm of wild reality,
And dreams in their development have breath,
And tears, and tortures, and the touch of joy;
They leave a weight upon our waking thoughts,
They take a weight from off our waking toils,
They do divide our being; they become
A portion of ourselves as of our time,
And look like heralds of eternity;
They pass like spirits of the past,--they speak
Like sibyls of the future; they have power,--
The tyranny of pleasure and of pain;
They make us what we were not,--what they will,
And shake us with the vision that's gone by.
The dread of vanished shadows.--Are they so?
Is not the past all shadow? What are they?
Creations of the mind?--The mind can make
Substances, and people planets of its own
With beings brighter than have been, and give
A breath to forms which can outlive all flesh.
I would recall a vision which I dreamed
Perchance in sleep,--for in itself a thought,
A slumbering thought, is capable of years,
And curdles a long life into one hour.

I saw two beings in the hues of youth
Standing upon a hill, a gentle hill,
Green and of a mild declivity, the last
As 't were the cape of a long ridge of such,
Save that there was no sea to lave its base,
But a most living landscape, and the wave
Of woods and cornfields, and the abodes of men
Scattered at intervals, and wreathing smoke
Arising from such rustic roofs; the hill
Was crowned with a peculiar diadem
Of trees, in circular array, so fixed,
Not by the sport of nature, but of man:
These two, a maiden and a youth, were there
Gazing,--the one on all that was beneath
Fair as herself,--but the boy gazed on her;
And both were young, and one was beautiful;
And both were young,--yet not alike in youth.
As the sweet moon on the horizon's verge,
The maid was on the eve of womanhood;
The boy had fewer summers, but his heart
Had far outgrown his years, and to his eye
There was but one beloved face on earth,
And that was shining on him; he had looked
Upon it till it could not pass away;
He had no breath, no being, but in hers;
She was his voice; he did not speak to her,
But trembled on her words; she was his sight,
For his eye followed hers, and saw with hers,
Which colored all his objects;--he had ceased
To live with himself: she was his life,
The ocean to the river of his thoughts,
Which terminated all; upon a tone,
A touch of hers, his blood would ebb and flow,
And his cheek change tempestuously;--his heart
Unknowing of its cause of agony.
But she in these fond feelings had no share:
Her sighs were not for him; to her he was
Even as a brother,--but no more; 'twas much,
For brotherless she was, save in the name
Her infant friendship had bestowed on him;
Herself the solitary scion left
Of a time-honored race. It was a name
Which pleased him, and yet pleased him not,--and why?
Time taught him a deep answer--when she loved
Another; even _now_ she loved another,
And on the summit of the hill she stood,
Looking afar if yet her lover's steed
Kept pace with her expectancy, and flew.

A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
There was an ancient mansion, and before
Its walls there was a steed caparisoned;
Within an antique oratory stood
The boy of whom I spake;--he was alone,
And pale, and pacing to and fro: anon
He sate him down, and seized a pen and traced
Words which I could not guess of; then he leaned
His bowed head on his hands and shook, as 'twere
With a convulsion,--then arose again,
And with his teeth and quivering hands did tear
What he had written, but he shed no tears,
And he did calm himself, and fix his brow
Into a kind of quiet; as he paused,
The lady of his love re-entered there;
She was serene and smiling then, and yet
She knew she was by him beloved; she knew--
For quickly comes such knowledge--that his heart
Was darkened with her shadow, and she saw
That he was wretched, but she saw not all.
He rose, and with a cold and gentle grasp
He took her hand; a moment o'er his face
A tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced, and then it faded, as it came;
He dropped the hand he held, and with slow steps
Retired, but not as bidding her adieu,
For they did part with mutual smiles; he passed
From out the massy gate of that old Hall,
And mounting on his steed he went his way;
And ne'er repassed that hoary threshold more.

A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The boy was sprung to manhood; in the wilds
Of fiery climes he made himself a home,
And his soul drank their sunbeams; he was girt
With strange and dusky aspects; he was not
Himself like what he had been; on the sea
And on the shore he was a wanderer;
There was a mass of many images
Crowded like waves upon me, but he was
A part of all; and in the last he lay
Reposing from the noontide sultriness,
Couched among fallen columns, in the shade
Of ruined walls that had survived the names
Of those who reared them; by his sleeping side
Stood camels grazing, and some goodly steeds
Were fastened near a fountain; and a man,
Clad in a flowing garb, did watch the while,
While many of his tribe slumbered around:
And they were canopied by the blue sky,
So cloudless, clear, and purely beautiful,
That God alone was to be seen in heaven.

A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The lady of his love was wed with one
Who did not love her better: in her home,
A thousand leagues from his,--her native home,
She dwelt, begirt with growing infancy,
Daughters and sons of beauty,--but behold!
Upon her face there was the tint of grief,
The settled shadow of an inward strife,
And an unquiet drooping of the eye,
As if its lids were charged with unshed tears.
What could her grief be?--she had all she loved,
And he who had so loved her was not there
To trouble with bad hopes, or evil wish,
Or ill-repressed affliction, her pure thoughts.
What could her grief be?--she had loved him not,
Nor given him cause to deem himself beloved,
Nor could he be a part of that which preyed
Upon her mind--a spectre of the past.

A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The wanderer was returned.--I saw him stand
Before an altar--with a gentle bride;
Her face was fair, but was not that which made
The starlight of his boyhood;--as he stood
Even at the altar, o'er his brow there came
The selfsame aspect and the quivering shock
That in the antique oratory shook
His bosom in its solitude; and then--
As in that hour--a moment o'er his face
The tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced,--and then it faded as it came,
And he stood calm and quiet, and he spoke
The fitting vows, but heard not his own words,
And all things reeled around him; he could see
Not that which was, nor that which should have been,--
But the old mansion, and the accustomed hall,
And the remembered chambers, and the place,
The day, the hour, the sunshine, and the shade,
All things pertaining to that place and hour,
And her who was his destiny, came back
And thrust themselves between him and the light;
What business had they there at such a time?

A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The lady of his love;--O, she was changed,
As by the sickness of the soul! her mind
Had wandered from its dwelling, and her eyes,
They had not their own lustre, but the look
Which is not of the earth; she was become
The queen of a fantastic realm; her thoughts
Were combinations of disjointed things,
And forms impalpable and unperceived
Of others' sight familiar were to hers.
And this the world calls frenzy; but the wise
Have a far deeper madness, and the glance
Of melancholy is a fearful gift;
What is it but the telescope of truth,
Which strips the distance of its fantasies,
And brings life near in utter nakedness,
Making the cold reality too real!

A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The wanderer was alone as heretofore,
The beings which surrounded him were gone,
Or were at war with him; he was a mark
For blight and desolation, compassed round
With hatred and contention; pain was mixed
In all which was served up to him, until,
Like to the Pontic monarch of old days,
He fed on poisons, and they had no power,
But were a kind of nutriment; he lived
Through that which had been death to many men,
And made him friends of mountains: with the stars
And the quick Spirit of the universe
He held his dialogues; and they did teach
To him the magic of their mysteries;
To him the book of Night was opened wide,
And voices from the deep abyss revealed
A marvel and a secret.--Be it so.

My dream was past; it had no further change.
It was of a strange order, that the doom
Of these two creatures should be thus traced out
Almost like a reality,--the one
To end in madness--both in misery.

LORD BYRON.



ALAS! HOW LIGHT A CAUSE MAY MOVE.

     FROM "THE LIGHT OF THE HAREM."


Alas! how light a cause may move
Dissension between hearts that love!
Hearts that the world in vain has tried,
And sorrow but more closely tied;
That stood the storm when waves were rough,
Yet in a sunny hour fall off,
Like ships that have gone down at sea,
When heaven was all tranquillity!

A something light as air,--a look,
  A word unkind or wrongly taken,--
O, love that tempests never shook,
  A breath, a touch like this has shaken!
And ruder words will soon rush in
To spread the breach that words begin;
And eyes forget the gentle ray
They wore in courtship's smiling day;
And voices lose the tone that shed
A tenderness round all they said;
Till fast declining, one by one,
The sweetnesses of love are gone,
And hearts, so lately mingled, seem
Like broken clouds,--or like the stream,
That smiling left the mountain's brow,
  As though its waters ne'er could sever,
Yet, ere it reach the plain below,
  Breaks into floods that part forever.

O you, that have the charge of Love,
  Keep him in rosy bondage bound,
As in the Fields of Bliss above
  He sits, with flowerets fettered round;--
Loose not a tie that round him clings,
Nor ever let him use his wings;
For even an hour, a minute's flight
Will rob the plumes of half their light.
Like that celestial bird,--whose nest
  Is found beneath far Eastern skies,--
  Whose wings, though radiant when at rest,
Lose all their glory when he flies!

THOMAS MOORE.



BLIGHTED LOVE.


Flowers are fresh, and bushes green,
  Cheerily the linnets sing;
Winds are soft, and skies serene;
  Time, however, soon shall throw
    Winter's snow
O'er the buxom breast of Spring!

Hope, that buds in lover's heart,
  Lives not through the scorn of years;
Time makes love itself depart;
  Time and scorn congeal the mind,--
    Looks unkind
Freeze affection's warmest tears.

Time shall make the bushes green;
  Time dissolve the winter snow;
Winds be soft, and skies serene;
  Linnets sing their wonted strain:
    But again
Blighted love shall never blow!

From the Portuguese of LUIS DE CAMOENS.
Translation of LORD STRANGFORD.



THE NEVERMORE.


Look in my face; my name is Might-have-been;
  I am also called No-more, Too-late, Farewell;
  Unto thine ear I hold the dead-sea shell
Cast up thy Life's foam-fretted feet between;
Unto thine eyes the glass where that is seen
  Which had Life's form and Love's, but by my spell
  Is now a shaken shadow intolerable,
Of ultimate things unuttered the frail screen.

Mark me, how still I am! But should there dart
  One moment through my soul the soft surprise
  Of that winged Peace which lulls the breath of sighs,--
Then shalt thou see me smile, and turn apart
Thy visage to mine ambush at thy heart
  Sleepless with cold commemorative eyes.

DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI.



THE PORTRAIT.


Midnight past! Not a sound of aught
  Through the silent house, but the wind at his prayers.
I sat by the dying fire, and thought
  Of the dear dead woman upstairs.

A night of tears! for the gusty rain
  Had ceased, but the eaves were dripping yet;
And the moon looked forth, as though in pain,
  With her face all white and wet:

Nobody with me, my watch to keep,
  But the friend of my bosom, the man I love:
And grief had sent him fast to sleep
  In the chamber up above.

Nobody else, in the country place
  All round, that knew of my loss beside,
But the good young Priest with the Raphael-face,
  Who confessed her when she died.

That good young Priest is of gentle nerve,
  And my grief had moved him beyond control;
For his lips grew white, as I could observe,
  When he speeded her parting soul.

I sat by the dreary hearth alone:
  I thought of the pleasant days of yore:
I said, "The staff of my life is gone:
  The woman I loved is no more.

"On her cold dead bosom my portrait lies,
  Which next to her heart she used to wear--
Haunting it o'er with her tender eyes
  When my own face was not there.

"It is set all round with rubies red,
  And pearls which a Peri, might have kept.
For each ruby there my heart hath bled:
  For each pearl my eyes have wept."

And I said--"The thing is precious to me:
  They will bury her soon in the churchyard clay;
It lies on her heart, and lost must be
  If I do not take it away."

I lighted my lamp at the dying flame,
  And crept up the stairs that creaked for fright,
Till into the chamber of death I came,
  Where she lay all in white.

The moon shone over her winding-sheet,
  There stark she lay on her carven bed:
Seven burning tapers about her feet,
  And seven about her head.

As I stretched my hand, I held my breath;
  I turned as I drew the curtains apart:
I dared not look on the face of death:
  I knew where to find her heart.

I thought at first, as my touch fell there,
  It had warmed that heart to life, with love;
For the thing I touched was warm, I swear,
  And I could feel it move.

'Twas the hand of a man, that was moving slow
  O'er the heart of the dead,--from the other side:
And at once the sweat broke over my brow.
  "Who is robbing the corpse?" I cried.

Opposite me by the tapers' light,
  The friend of my bosom, the man I loved,
Stood over the corpse, and all as white,
  And neither of us moved.

"What do you here, my friend?" ... The man
  Looked first at me, and then at the dead.
"There is a portrait here," he began;
  "There is. It is mine," I said.

Said the friend of my bosom, "Yours, no doubt,
  The portrait was, till a month ago,
When this suffering angel took that out,
  And placed mine there, I know."

"This woman, she loved me well," said I.
  "A month ago," said my friend to me:
"And in your throat," I groaned, "you lie!"
  He answered, ... "Let us see."

"Enough!" I returned, "let the dead decide:
  And whosesoever the portrait prove,
His shall it be, when the cause is tried,
  Where Death is arraigned by Love."

We found the portrait there, in its place:
  We opened it by the tapers' shine:
The gems were all unchanged: the face
  Was--neither his nor mine.
"One nail drives out another, at least!
  The face of the portrait there," I cried,
"Is our friend's, the Raphael-faced young Priest,
  Who confessed her when she died."

The setting is all of rubies red,
  And pearls which a Peri might have kept.
For each ruby there my heart hath bled:
  For each pearl my eyes have wept.

ROBERT BULWER-LYTTON (_Owen Meredith_).



ONLY A WOMAN.

     "She loves with love that cannot tire:
       And if, ah, woe! she loves alone,
     Through passionate duty love flames higher,
       As grass grows taller round a stone."

          --COVENTRY PATMORE.


So, the truth's out. I'll grasp it like a snake,--
It will not slay me. My heart shall not break
Awhile, if only for the children's sake.

For his, too, somewhat. Let him stand unblamed;
None say, he gave me less than honor claimed,
Except--one trifle scarcely worth being named--

The heart. That's gone. The corrupt dead might be
As easily raised up, breathing,--fair to see,
As he could bring his whole heart back to me.

I never sought him in coquettish sport,
Or courted him as silly maidens court,
And wonder when the longed-for prize falls short.

I only loved him,--any woman would:
But shut my love up till he came and sued,
Then poured it o'er his dry life like a flood.

I was so happy I could make him blest!--
So happy that I was his first and best,
As he mine,--when he took me to his breast.

Ah me! if only then he had been true!
If for one little year, a month or two,
He had given me love for love, as was my due!

Or had he told me, ere the deed was done,
He only raised me to his heart's dear throne--
Poor substitute--because the queen was gone!

O, had he whispered, when his sweetest kiss
Was warm upon my mouth in fancied bliss,
He had kissed another woman even as this,--

It were less bitter! Sometimes I could weep
To be thus cheated, like a child asleep;--
Were not my anguish far too dry and deep.

So I built my house upon another's ground;
Mocked with a heart just caught at the rebound,--
A cankered thing that looked so firm and sound.

And when that heart grew colder,--colder still,
I, ignorant, tried all duties to fulfil,
Blaming my foolish pain, exacting will,

All,--anything but him. It was to be
The full draught others drink up carelessly
Was made this bitter Tantalus-cup for me.

I say again,--he gives me all I claimed,
I and my children never shall be shamed:
He is a just man,--he will live unblamed.

Only--O God, O God, to cry for bread.
And get a stone! Daily to lay my head
Upon a bosom where the old love's dead!

Dead?--Fool! It never lived. It only stirred
Galvanic, like an hour-cold corpse. None heard:
So let me bury it without a word.

He'll keep that other woman from my sight.
I know not if her face be foul or bright;
I only know that it was his delight--

As his was mine; I only know he stands
Pale, at the touch of their long-severed hands,
Then to a flickering smile his lips commands,

Lest I should grieve, or jealous anger show.
He need not. When the ship's gone down, I trow,
We little reck whatever wind may blow.

And so my silent moan begins and ends,
No world's laugh or world's taunt, no pity of friends
Or sneer of foes, with this my torment blends.

None knows,--none heeds. I have a little pride;
Enough to stand up, wifelike, by his side,
With the same smile as when I was his bride.

And I shall take his children to my arms;
They will not miss these fading, worthless charms;
Their kiss--ah! unlike his--all pain disarms.

And haply as the solemn years go by,
He will think sometimes, with regretful sigh,
The other woman was less true than I.

DINAH MARIA MULOCK CRAIK.



DOROTHY IN THE GARRET.


In the low-raftered garret, stooping
  Carefully over the creaking boards,
Old Maid Dorothy goes a-groping
  Among its dusty and cobwebbed hoards;
Seeking some bundle of patches, hid
  Far under the eaves, or bunch of sage,
Or satchel hung on its nail, amid
  The heirlooms of a bygone age.

There is the ancient family chest,
  There the ancestral cards and hatchel;
Dorothy, sighing, sinks down to rest,
  Forgetful of patches, sage, and satchel.
Ghosts of faces peer from the gloom
  Of the chimney, where with swifts and reel,
And the long-disused, dismantled loom,
  Stands the old-fashioned spinning-wheel.

She sees it back in the clean-swept kitchen,
  A part of her girlhood's little world;
Her mother is there by the window, stitching;
  Spindle buzzes, and reel is whirled
With many a click: on her little stool
  She sits, a child, by the open door,
Watching, and dabbling her feet in the pool
  Of sunshine spilled on the gilded floor

Her sisters are spinning all day long;
  To her wakening sense the first sweet warning
Of daylight come is the cheerful song
  To the hum of the wheel in the early morning.
Benjie, the gentle, red-cheeked boy.
  On his way to school, peeps in at the gate;
In neat white pinafore, pleased and coy,
  She reaches a hand to her bashful mate;

And under the elms, a prattling pair.
  Together they go, through glimmer and gloom:--
It all comes back to her, dreaming there
  In the low-raftered garret room;
The hum of the wheel, and the summer weather.
  The heart's first trouble, and love's beginning,
Are all in her memory linked together;
  And now it is she herself that is spinning.

With the bloom of youth on cheek and lip.
  Turning the spokes with the flashing pin,
Twisting the thread from the spindle-tip,
  Stretching it out and winding it in.
To and fro, with a blithesome tread,
  Singing she goes, and her heart is full,
And many a long-drawn golden thread
  Of fancy is spun with the shining wool.

Her father sits in his favorite place,
  Puffing his pipe by the chimney-side;
Through curling clouds his kindly face
  Glows upon her with love and pride.
Lulled by the wheel, in the old arm-chair
  Her mother is musing, cat in lap,
With beautiful drooping head, and hair
  Whitening under her snow-white cap.

One by one, to the grave, to the bridal,
  They have followed her sisters from the door;
Now they are old, and she is their idol:--
  It all comes back on her heart once more.
In the autumn dusk the hearth gleams brightly,
  The wheel is set by the shadowy wall,--
A hand at the latch,--'tis lifted lightly,
  And in walks Benjie, manly and tall.

His chair is placed; the old man tips
  The pitcher, and brings his choicest fruit;
Benjie basks in the blaze, and sips,
  And tells his story, and joints his flute:
O, sweet the tunes, the talk, the laughter!
  They fill the hour with a glowing tide;
But sweeter the still, deep moments after,
  When she is alone by Benjie's side.

But once with angry words they part:
  O, then the weary, weary days!
Ever with restless, wretched heart,
  Plying her task, she turns to gaze
Far up the road; and early and late
  She harks for a footstep at the door,
And starts at the gust that swings the gate,
  And prays for Benjie, who comes no more.

Her fault? O Benjie, and could you steel
  Your thoughts towards one who loved you so?--
Solace she seeks in the whirling wheel,
  In duty and love that lighten woe;
Striving with labor, not in vain,
  To drive away the dull day's dreariness,--
Blessing the toil that blunts the pain
  Of a deeper grief in the body's weariness.

Proud and petted and spoiled was she:
  A word, and all her life is changed!
His wavering love too easily
  In the great, gay city grows estranged:
One year: she sits in the old church pew;
  A rustle, a murmur,--O Dorothy! hide
Your face and shut from your soul the view--
  'Tis Benjie leading a white-veiled bride!

Now father and mother have long been dead,
  And the bride sleeps under a churchyard stone,
And a bent old man with a grizzled head
  Walks up the long dim aisle alone.
Years blur to a mist; and Dorothy
  Sits doubting betwixt the ghost she seems,
And the phantom of youth, more real than she,
  That meets her there in that haunt of dreams.

Bright young Dorothy, idolized daughter,
  Sought by many a youthful adorer,
Life, like a new-risen dawn on the water,
  Shining an endless vista before her!
Old Maid Dorothy, wrinkled and gray,
  Groping under the farm-house eaves,--
And life was a brief November day
  That sets on a world of withered leaves!

Yet faithfulness in the humblest part
  Is better at last than proud success,
And patience and love in a chastened heart
  Are pearls more precious than happiness;
And in that morning when she shall wake
  To the spring-time freshness of youth again,
All trouble will seem but a flying flake,
  And lifelong sorrow a breath on the pane.

JOHN TOWNSEND TROWBRIDGE.



THE NUN AND HARP.


What memory fired her pallid face,
  What passion stirred her blood,
What tide of sorrow and desire
  Poured its forgotten flood
Upon a heart that ceased to beat,
Long since, with thought that life was sweet,
When nights were rich with vernal dusk,
  And the rose burst its bud?

Had not the western glory then
  Stolen through the latticed room,
Her funeral raiment would have shed
  A more heart-breaking gloom;
Had not a dimpled convent-maid
Hung in the doorway, half afraid,
And left the melancholy place
  Bright with her blush and bloom!

Beside the gilded harp she stood,
  And through the singing strings
Wound those wan hands of folded prayer
  In murmurous preludings.
Then, like a voice, the harp rang high
Its melody, as climb the sky,
Melting against the melting blue,
  Some bird's vibrating wings.

Ah, why, of all the songs that grow
  Forever tenderer,
Chose she that passionate refrain
  Where lovers 'mid the stir
Of wassailers that round them pass
Hide their sweet secret? Now, alas,
In her nun's habit, coifed and veiled,
  What meant that song to her!

Slowly the western ray forsook
  The statue in its shrine;
A sense of tears thrilled all the air
  Along the purpling line.
Earth seemed a place of graves that rang
To hollow footsteps, while she sang,
"Drink to me only with thine eyes.
  And I will pledge with mine!"

HARRIET PRESCOTT SPOFFORD.



FIDELITY IN DOUBT.


  Come, lady, to my song incline,
  The last that shall assail thine ear.
  None other cares my strains to hear,
And scarce thou feign'st thyself therewith delighted!
Nor know I well if I am loved or slighted;
But this I know, thou radiant one and sweet,
That, loved or spurned, I die before thy feet!
  Yea, I will yield this life of mine
  In every deed, if cause appear,
  Without another boon to cheer.
Honor it is to be by thee incited
To any deed; and I, when most benighted
By doubt, remind me that times change and fleet,
And brave men still do their occasion meet.

From the French of GUIRAUD LEROUX.
Translation of HARRIET WATERS PRESTON.



FAITH.


Better trust all and be deceived,
And weep that trust and that deceiving,
Than doubt one heart that, if believed,
Had blessed one's life with true believing.

O, in this mocking world too fast
The doubting fiend o'ertakes our youth;
Better be cheated to the last
Than lose the blessed hope of truth.

FRANCES ANNE KEMBLE-BUTLER.

       *       *       *       *       *




II. PARTING AND ABSENCE



PARTING.


If thou dost bid thy friend farewell,
But for one night though that farewell may be,
Press thou his hand in thine.
How canst thou tell how far from thee
Fate or caprice may lead his steps ere that to-morrow comes?
Men have been known to lightly turn the corner of a street,
And days have grown to months, and months to lagging years,
Ere they have looked in loving eyes again.
Parting, at best, is underlaid
With tears and pain.
Therefore, lest sudden death should come between.
Or time, or distance, clasp with pressure firm
The hand of him who goeth forth;
Unseen, Fate goeth too.
Yes, find thou always time to say some earnest word
Between the idle talk,
Lest with thee henceforth,
Night and day, regret should walk.

COVENTRY PATMORE.



TO LUCASTA.

     ON GOING TO THE WARS.


Tell me not, sweet, I am unkinde,
  That from the nunnerie
Of thy chaste breast and quiet minde,
  To warre and armes I flee.

True, a new mistresse now I chase.--
  The first foe in the field;
And with a stronger faith imbrace
  A sword, a horse, a shield.

Yet this inconstancy is such
  As you, too, shall adore;
I could not love thee, deare, so much,
  Loved I not honour more.

RICHARD LOVELACE.



GOOD-BYE.


"Farewell! farewell!" is often heard
  From the lips of those who part:
'Tis a whispered tone,--'tis a gentle word,
  But it springs not from the heart.
It may serve for the lover's closing lay,
  To be sung 'neath a summer sky;
But give to me the lips that say
  The honest words, "Good-bye!"
"Adieu! adieu!" may greet the ear,
  In the guise of courtly speech:
But when we leave the kind and dear,
  'Tis not what the soul would teach.
Whene'er we grasp the hands of those
  We would have forever nigh,
The flame of Friendship bursts and glows
  In the warm, frank words, "Good-bye."

The mother, sending forth her child
  To meet with cares and strife,
Breathes through her tears her doubts and fears
  For the loved one's future life.
No cold "adieu," no "farewell," lives
  Within her choking sigh,
But the deepest sob of anguish gives,
  "God bless thee, boy! Good-bye!"

Go, watch the pale and dying one,
  When the glance hast lost its beam;
When the brow is cold as the marble stone,
  And the world a passing dream;
And the latest pressure of the hand,
  The look of the closing eye,
Yield what the heart _must_ understand,
  A long, a last Good-bye.

ANONYMOUS.



AE FOND KISS BEFORE WE PART.


Ae fond kiss, and then we sever;
Ae fareweel, alas, forever!
Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee;
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee.
Who shall say that fortune grieves him,
While the star of hope she leaves him?
Me, nae cheerfu' twinkle lights me;
Dark despair around benights me.

I'll ne'er blame my partial fancy--
Naething could resist my Nancy:
But to see her was to love her,
Love but her, and love forever.
Had we never loved sae kindly,
Had we never loved sae blindly,
Never met--or never parted,
We had ne'er been broken-hearted.

Fare thee weel, thou first and fairest!
Fare thee weel, thou best and dearest!
Thine be ilka joy and treasure,
Peace, enjoyment, love, and pleasure!
Ae fond kiss, and then we sever;
Ae fareweel, alas, forever!
Deep in heart-wrung tears I'll pledge thee,
Warring sighs and groans I'll wage thee!

ROBERT BURNS.



O, MY LUVE'S LIKE A RED, RED ROSE.


O, my Luve's like a red, red rose
  That's newly sprung in June:
O, my Luve's like the melodie
  That's sweetly played in tune.

As fair art thou, my bonnie lass,
  So deep in luve am I:
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
  Till a' the seas gang dry:

Till a' the seas gang dry, my dear.
  And the rocks melt wi' the sun:
And I will luve thee still, my dear,
  While the sands o' life shall run.

And fare thee weel, my only Luve!
  And fare thee weel awhile!
And I will come again, my Luve,
  Tho' it were ten thousand mile.

ROBERT BURNS.



MAID OF ATHENS, ERE WE PART.


Maid of Athens, ere we part,
Give, O, give me back my heart!
Or, since that has left my breast,
Keep it now, and take the rest!
Hear my vow before I go,
  [Greek: Zoe moy sas hagapo.][2]

By those tresses unconfined,
Wooed by each AEgean wind;
By those lids whose jetty fringe
Kiss thy soft cheeks' blooming tinge;
By those wild eyes like the roe,
  [Greek: Zoe moy sas hagapo.]

By that lip I long to taste;
By that zone-encircled waist;
By all the token-flowers that tell
What words can never speak so well;
By love's alternate joy and woe,
  [Greek: Zoe moy sas hagapo.]

Maid of Athens! I am gone.
Think of me, sweet! when alone.
Though I fly to Istambol,
Athens holds my heart and soul:
Can I cease to love thee? No!
  [Greek: Zoe moy sas hagapo.]

LORD BYRON.

  [2] _Zoe mou, sas agap[-o]_; My life. I love thee.



SONG.

     OF THE YOUNG HIGHLANDER SUMMONED FROM HIS BRIDE
     BY THE "FIERY CROSS OF RODERICK DHU."

     FROM "THE LADY OF THE LAKE."


The heath this night must be my bed,
The bracken curtain for my head,
My lullaby the warder's tread,
  Far, far from love and thee, Mary;
To-morrow eve, more stilly laid
My couch may be my bloody plaid,
My vesper song, thy wail, sweet maid!
  It will not waken me, Mary!

I may not, dare not, fancy now
The grief that clouds thy lovely brow,
I dare not think upon thy vow,
  And all it promised me, Mary.
No fond regret must Norman know;
When bursts Clan-Alpine on the foe,
His heart must be like bended bow,
  His foot like arrow free, Mary!

A time will come with feeling fraught!
For, if I fall in battle fought,
Thy hapless lover's dying thought
  Shall be a thought on thee. Mary.
And if returned from conquered foes,
How blithely will the evening close,
How sweet the linnet sing repose,
  To my young bride and me, Mary!

SIR WALTER SCOTT.



BLACK-EYED SUSAN.


All in the Downs the fleet was moored,
  The streamers waving in the wind,
When black-eyed Susan came aboard;
  "O, where shall I my true-love find?
Tell me, ye jovial sailors, tell me true
If my sweet William sails among the crew."

William, who high upon the yard
  Rocked with the billow to and fro,
Soon as her well-known voice he heard
  He sighed, and cast his eyes below:
The cord slides swiftly through his glowing hands,
And quick as lightning on the deck he stands.

So the sweet lark, high poised in air,
  Shuts close his pinions to his breast
If chance his mate's shrill call he hear,
  And drops at once into her nest:--
The noblest captain in the British fleet
Might envy William's lips those kisses sweet.

"O Susan, Susan, lovely dear,
  My vows shall ever true remain;
Let me kiss off that falling tear;
  We only part to meet again.
Change as ye list, ye winds; my heart shall be
The faithful compass that still points to thee.

"Believe not what the landmen say
  Who tempt with doubts thy constant mind;
They'll tell thee, sailors, when away,
  In every port a mistress find;
Yes, yes, believe them when they tell thee so,
For thou art present wheresoe'er I go.

"If to fair India's coast we sail,
  Thy eyes are seen in diamonds bright,
Thy breath is Afric's spicy gale,
  Thy skin is ivory so white.
Thus every beauteous object that I view
Wakes in my soul some charm of lovely Sue.

"Though battle call me from thy arms,
  Let not my pretty Susan mourn;
Though cannons roar, yet safe from harms
  William shall to his dear return.
Love turns aside the balls that round me fly,
Lest precious tears should drop from Susan's eye."
The boatswain gave the dreadful word,
  The sails their swelling bosom spread;
No longer must she stay aboard:
  They kissed, she sighed, he hung his head.
Her lessening boat unwilling rows to land;
  "Adieu!" she cried; and waved her lily hand.


JOHN GAY.



THE PARTING LOVERS.


She says, "The cock crows,--hark!"
He says, "No! still 'tis dark."

She says, "The dawn grows bright,"
He says, "O no, my Light."

She says, "Stand up and say,
Gets not the heaven gray?"

He says, "The morning star
Climbs the horizon's bar."

She says, "Then quick depart:
Alas! you now must start;

But give the cock a blow
Who did begin our woe!"

ANONYMOUS. From the Chinese.
Translation of WILLIAM. R. ALGER.



LOCHABER NO MORE.


Farewell to Lochaber! and farewell, my Jean,
Where heartsome with thee I hae mony day been;
For Lochaber no more, Lochaber no more,
We'll maybe return to Lochaber no more!
These tears that I shed they are a' for my dear,
And no for the dangers attending on wear,
Though borne on rough seas to a far bloody shore,
Maybe to return to Lochaber no more.

Though hurricanes rise, and rise every wind,
They'll ne'er make a tempest like that in my mind;
Though loudest of thunder on louder waves roar,
That's naething like leaving my love on the shore.
To leave thee behind me my heart is sair pained;
By ease that's inglorious no fame can be gained;
And beauty and love's the reward of the brave,
And I must deserve it before I can crave.

Then glory, my Jeany, maun plead my excuse;
Since honor commands me, how can I refuse?
Without it I ne'er can have merit for thee,
And without thy favor I'd better not be.
I gae then, my lass, to win honor and fame,
And if I should luck to come gloriously hame,
I'll bring a heart to thee with love running o'er,
And then I'll leave thee and Lochaber no more.

ALLAN RAMSAY.



AS SLOW OUR SHIP.


As slow our ship her foamy track
  Against the wind was cleaving.
Her trembling pennant still looked back
  To that dear isle 'twas leaving.
So loath we part from all we love,
  From all the links that bind us;
So turn our hearts, as on we rove,
  To those we've left behind us!

When, round the bowl, of vanished years
  We talk with joyous seeming,--
With smiles that might as well be tears,
  So faint, so sad their beaming;
While memory brings us back again
  Each early tie that twined us,
O, sweet's the cup that circles then
  To those we've left behind us!

And when, in other climes, we meet
  Some isle or vale enchanting,
Where all looks flowery, wild, and sweet,
  And naught but love is wanting;
We think how great had been our bliss
  If Heaven had but assigned us
To live and die in scenes like this,
  With some we've left behind us!

As travellers oft look back at eve
  When eastward darkly going,
To gaze upon that light they leave
  Still faint behind, them glowing,--
So, when the close of pleasure's day
  To gloom hath near consigned us,
We turn to catch one fading ray
  Of joy that's left behind us.

THOMAS MOORE.



QUA CURSUM VENTUS.


As ships, becalmed at eve, that lay
  With canvas drooping, side by side,
Two towers of sail at dawn of day
  Are scarce long leagues apart descried.

When fell the night, up sprang the breeze,
  And all the darkling hours they plied,
Nor dreamt but each the selfsame seas
  By each was cleaving, side by side:

E'en so,--but why the tale reveal
  Of those whom, year by year unchanged,
Brief absence joined anew to feel,
  Astounded, soul from soul estranged?

At dead of night their sails were filled,
  And onward each rejoicing steered;--
Ah! neither blame, for neither willed
  Or wist what first with dawn appeared.

To veer, how vain! On, onward strain,
  Brave barks! In light, in darkness too,
Through winds and tides one compass guides;
  To that and your own selves be true.

But O blithe breeze! and O great seas!
  Though ne'er, that earliest parting past,
On your wide plain they join again,--
  Together lead them home at last.

One port, methought, alike they sought,--
  One purpose hold where'er they fare;
O bounding breeze, O rushing seas,
  At last, at last, unite them there!

ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH.



ADIEU, ADIEU! MY NATIVE SHORE.


Adieu, adieu! my native shore
  Fades o'er the waters blue;
The night-winds sigh, the breakers roar,
  And shrieks the wild sea-mew.
Yon sun that sets upon the sea
  We follow in his flight;
Farewell awhile to him and thee,
  My native Land--Good Night!

A few short hours, and he will rise
  To give the morrow birth;
And I shall hail the main and skies,
  But not my mother earth.
Deserted is my own good hall,
  Its hearth is desolate;
Wild weeds are gathering on the wall;
  My dog howls at the gate.

LORD BYRON.



FAREWELL TO HIS WIFE.


Fare thee well! and if forever,
  Still forever, fare thee well;
Even though unforgiving, never
  'Gainst thee shall my heart rebel.

Would that breast were bared before thee
  Where thy head so oft hath lain,
While that placid sleep came o'er thee
  Which thou ne'er canst know again:

Would that breast, by thee glanced over,
  Every inmost thought could show!
Then thou wouldst at last discover
  'Twas not well to spurn it so.

Though the world for this commend thee,--
  Though it smile upon the blow,
Even its praises must offend thee,
  Founded on another's woe:

Though my many faults defaced me,
  Could no other arm be found
Than the one which once embraced me,
  To inflict a cureless wound?

Yet, O, yet thyself deceived not:
  Love may sink by slow decay;
But by sudden wrench, believe not
  Hearts can thus be torn away:

Still thy own its life retaineth,--
  Still must mine, though bleeding, beat;
And the undying thought which paineth
  Is--that we no more may meet.

These are words of deeper sorrow
  Than the wail above the dead;
Both shall live, but every morrow
  Wake us from a widowed bed.

And when thou wouldst solace gather,
  When our child's first accents flow,
Wilt thou teach her to say "Father!"
  Though his care she must forego?

When her little hands shall press thee,
  When her lip to thine is pressed,
Think of him whose prayer shall bless thee,
  Think of him thy love had blessed!

Should her lineaments resemble
  Those thou nevermore mayst see,
Then thy heart will softly tremble
  With a pulse yet true to me.

All my faults perchance thou knowest,
  All my madness none can know;
All my hopes, where'er thou goest,
  Wither, yet with _thee_ they go.
Every feeling hath been shaken;
  Pride, which not a world could bow,
Bows to thee,--by thee forsaken,
  Even my soul forsakes me now;

But 't is done; all words are idle,--
  Words from me are vainer still;
But the thoughts we cannot bridle
  Force their way without the will.

Fare thee well!--thus disunited,
  Torn from every nearer tie,
Seared in heart, and lone, and blighted,
  More than this I scarce can die.

LORD BYRON.



COME, LET US KISSE AND PARTE.


Since there's no helpe,--come, let us kisse and parte,
  Nay, I have done,--you get no more of me;
And I am glad,--yea, glad with all my hearte,
  That thus so cleanly I myselfe can free.
Shake hands forever!--cancel all our vows;
  And when we meet at any time againe,
Be it not seene in either of our brows,
  That we one jot of former love retaine.

Now--at the last gaspe of Love's latest breath--
  When, his pulse failing, Passion speechless lies;
When Faith is kneeling by his bed of death,
  And Innocence is closing up his eyes,
Now! if thou wouldst--when all have given him over--
  From death to life thou mightst him yet recover.

MICHAEL DRAYTON.



FAREWELL! THOU ART TOO DEAR.

     SONNET LXXXVII.


Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
And like enough thou know'st thy estimate:
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing;
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting,
And so my patent back again is swerving.
Thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing?
Or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking;
So thy great gift, upon misprision growing,
Comes home again, on better judgment making.
Thus have I had thee, as a dream doth flatter;
In sleep a king, but, waking, no such matter.

SHAKESPEARE.



KATHLEEN MAVOURNEEN.


Kathleen Mavourneen! the gray dawn is breaking,
  The horn of the hunter is heard on the hill;
The lark from her light wing the bright dew is shaking,--
  Kathleen Mavourneen! what, slumbering still?

Oh, hast thou forgotten how soon we must sever?
  Oh! hast thou forgotten this day we must part?
It may be for years, and it may be forever!
  Oh, why art thou silent, thou voice of my heart?
Oh! why art thou silent, Kathleen Mavourneen?

Kathleen Mavourneen, awake from thy slumbers!
  The blue mountains glow in the sun's golden light;
Ah, where is the spell that once hung on my numbers?
  Arise in thy beauty, thou star of my night!

Mavourneen, Mavourneen, my sad tears are falling,
  To think that from Erin and thee I must part!
It may be for years, and it may be forever!
  Then why art thou silent, thou voice of my heart?
Then why art thou silent, Kathleen Mavourneen?

JULIA (OR LOUISA MACARTNEY) CRAWFORD.



WE PARTED IN SILENCE.


We parted in silence, we parted by night,
  On the banks of that lonely river;
Where the fragrant limes their boughs unite,
  We met--and we parted forever!
The night-bird sung, and the stars above
  Told many a touching story,
Of friends long passed to the kingdom of love,
  Where the soul wears its mantle of glory.

We parted in silence,--our cheeks were wet
  With the tears that were past controlling;
We vowed we would never, no, never forget,
  And those vows at the time were consoling;
But those lips that echoed the sounds of mine
  Are as cold as that lonely river;
And that eye, that beautiful spirit's shrine,
  Has shrouded its fires forever.

And now on the midnight sky I look,
  And my heart grows full of weeping;
Each star is to me a sealed book,
  Some tale of that loved one keeping.
We parted in silence,--we parted in tears,
  On the banks of that lonely river:
But the odor and bloom of those bygone years
  Shall hang o'er its waters forever.

JULIA (OR LOUISA MACARTNEY) CRAWFORD.



AUF WIEDERSEHEN.

     SUMMER.


The little gate was reached at last,
  Half hid in lilacs down the lane;
She pushed it wide, and, as she past,
A wistful look she backward cast,
  And said,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"
With hand on latch, a vision white
  Lingered reluctant, and again
Half doubting if she did aright,
Soft as the dews that fell that night,
  She said,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

The lamp's clear gleam flits up the stair;
  I linger in delicious pain;
Ah, in that chamber, whose rich air
To breathe in thought I scarcely dare,
  Thinks she,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

'Tis thirteen years; once more I press
  The turf that silences the lane;
I hear the rustle of her dress,
I smell the lilacs, and--ah, yes,
  I hear,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

Sweet piece of bashful maiden art!
  The English words had seemed too fain,
But these--they drew us heart to heart,
Yet held us tenderly apart;
  She said,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.



PALINODE.

     AUTUMN.


Still thirteen years: 't is autumn now
  On field and hill, in heart and brain;
The naked trees at evening sough;
The leaf to the forsaken bough
  Sighs not,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

Two watched yon oriole's pendent dome,
  That now is void, and dank with rain,
And one,--oh, hope more frail than foam!
The bird to his deserted home
  Sings not,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

The loath gate swings with rusty creak;
  Once, parting there, we played at pain;
There came a parting, when the weak
And fading lips essayed to speak
  Vainly,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

Somewhere is comfort, somewhere faith,
  Though thou in outer dark remain;
One sweet sad voice ennobles death,
And still, for eighteen centuries saith
  Softly,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

If earth another grave must bear,
  Yet heaven hath won a sweeter strain,
And something whispers my despair,
That, from an orient chamber there,
  Floats down,--"_Auf wiedersehen_!"

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.



FAREWELL!--BUT WHENEVER.


Farewell!--but whenever you welcome the hour
That awakens the night-song of mirth in your bower.
Then think of the friend that once welcomed it too.
And forgot his own griefs, to be happy with you.
His griefs may return--not a hope may remain
Of the few that have brightened his pathway of pain--
But he ne'er can forget the short vision that threw
Its enchantment around him while lingering with you!

And still on that evening when Pleasure fills up
To the highest top sparkle each heart and each cup,
Where'er my path lies, be it gloomy or bright,
My soul, happy friends! will be with you that night;
Shall join in your revels, your sports, and your wiles,
And return to me, beaming all o'er with your smiles--
Too blest if it tell me that, 'mid the gay cheer,
Some kind voice has murmured, "I wish he were here!"

Let Fate do her worst, there are relics of joy,
Bright dreams of the past, which she cannot destroy;
Which come in the night-time of sorrow and care,
And bring back the features which joy used to wear.
Long, long be my heart with such memories filled!
Like the vase in which roses have once been distilled--
You may break, you may shatter the vase, if you will,
But the scent of the roses will hang round it still.

THOMAS MOORE.



PARTING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.

     FROM "THE ILIAD," BOOK VI.


  "Too daring prince! ah whither dost thou run?
Ah too forgetful of thy wife and son!
And think'st thou not how wretched we shall be,
A widow I, a helpless orphan he!
For sure such courage length of life denies,
And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain!
Oh grant me, gods! ere Hector meets his doom,
All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
And end with sorrows as they first begun.
No parent now remains, my griefs to share,
No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
His fate compassion in the victor bred;
Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
Then raised a mountain where his bones were burned;
The mountain nymphs the rural tomb adorned;
Jove's sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
A barren shade, and in his honor grow.

 "Yet while my Hector still survives, I see
My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee.
Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all,
Once more will perish if my Hector fall.
Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share;
Oh prove a husband's and a father's care!
That quarter most the skillful Greeks annoy,
Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy:
Thou, from this tower defend th'important post;
There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,
And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
Let others in the field their arms employ,
But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy."

  The chief replied: "That post shall be my care,
Nor that alone, but all the works of war.
[How would the sons of Troy, in arms renowned,
And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground,
Attaint the lustre of my former name,
Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
My early youth was bred to martial pains,
My soul impels me to th'embattled plains:
Let me be foremost to defend the throne,
And guard my father's glories, and my own.
Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates;
(How my heart trembles while my tongue relates)
The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
Not Priam's hoary hairs denied with gore,
Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
As thine, Andromache! thy griefs I dread;
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!]
In Argive looms our battles to design,
And woes of which so large a part was thine!
To bear the victor's hard commands or bring
The weight of waters from Hyperia's spring.
There, while you groan beneath the load of life,
They cry, Behold the mighty Hector's wife!
Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
Embitters all thy woes by naming me.
The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
A thousand griefs, shall waken at the name!
May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
Pressed with a load of monumental clay!
Thy Hector, wrapped in everlasting sleep,
Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep."

  Thus having spoke, th' illustrious chief of Troy
Stretched his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
The babe clung crying to his nurse's breast,
Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
And Hector hasted to relieve his child;
The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
And placed the beaming helmet on the ground.
Then kissed the child, and, lifting high in air,
Thus to the gods preferred a father's prayer:

  "O thou whose glory fills th' ethereal throne,
And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
Against his country's foes the war to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future age!
So when, triumphant from successful toils,
Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
And say, This chief transcends his father's fame:
While pleased, amidst the general shouts of Troy,
His mother's conscious heart o'erflows with joy."

  He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms
Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
Hushed to repose, and with a smile surveyed.
The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
She mingled with the smile a tender tear.
The softened chief with kind compassion viewed,
And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

  "Andromache! my soul's far better part,
Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
Fixed is the term to all the race of earth,
And such the hard condition of our birth.
No force can then resist, no flight can save;
All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
Me glory summons to the martial scene,
The field of combat is the sphere for men.
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
The first in danger as the first in fame."

  Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye,
That streamed at every look: then, moving slow,
Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
Through all her train the soft infection ran;
The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
And mourn the living Hector as the dead.

From the Greek of HOMER.
Translation of ALEXANDER POPE.




HECTOR TO HIS WIFE.

     FROM THE ILIAD, BOOK VI.

[The following extract is given as showing a more modern style of
translation. It embraces the bracketed portion of the foregoing from
Pope's version.]


I too have thought of all this, dear wife, but I fear the reproaches
Both of the Trojan youths and the long-robed maidens of Troja,
If like a cowardly churl I should keep me aloof from the combat:
Nor would my spirit permit; for well I have learnt to be valiant,
Fighting aye 'mong the first of the Trojans marshalled in battle,
Striving to keep the renown of my sire and my own unattainted.
Well, too well, do I know,--both my mind and my spirit agreeing,
That there will be a day when sacred Troja shall perish.
Priam will perish too, and the people of Priam, the spear-armed.
Still, I have not such care for the Trojans doomed to destruction,
No, nor for Hecuba's self, nor for Priam, the monarch, my father,
Nor for my brothers' fate, who, though they be many and valiant,
All in the dust may lie low by the hostile spears of Achaia,
As for thee, when some youth of the brazen-mailed Achaeans
Weeping shall bear thee away, and bereave thee forever of freedom.

Translation of E.C. HAWTREY.



TO LUCASTA.


  If to be absent were to be
      Away from thee;
    Or that, when I am gone,
    You or I were alone;
  Then, my Lucasta, might I crave
Pity from blustering wind or swallowing wave.

  But I'll not sigh one blast or gale
      To swell my sail,
    Or pay a tear to 'suage
    The foaming blue-god's rage;
  For, whether he will let me pass
Or no, I'm still as happy as I was.

  Though seas and lands be 'twixt us both,
      Our faith and troth,
    Like separated souls,
    All time and space controls:
  Above the highest sphere we meet,
Unseen, unknown; and greet as angels greet.

  So, then, we do anticipate
      Our after-fate,
  And are alive i' the skies,
    If thus our lips and eyes
  Can speak like spirits unconfined
In heaven,--their earthly bodies left behind.

RICHARD LOVELACE.



TO HER ABSENT SAILOR.

     FROM "THE TENT ON THE BEACH."


Her window opens to the bay,
On glistening light or misty gray,
And there at dawn and set of day
  In prayer she kneels:
"Dear Lord!" she saith, "to many a home
From wind and wave the wanderers come;
I only see the tossing foam
  Of stranger keels.

"Blown out and in by summer gales,
The stately ships, with crowded sails,
And sailors leaning o'er their rails,
  Before me glide;
They come, they go, but nevermore,
Spice-laden from the Indian shore,
I see his swift-winged Isidore
  The waves divide.

"O Thou! with whom the night is day
And one the near and far away,
Look out on yon gray waste, and say
  Where lingers he.
Alive, perchance, on some lone beach
Or thirsty isle beyond the reach
Of man, he hears the mocking speech
  Of wind and sea.

"O dread and cruel deep, reveal
The secret which thy waves conceal,
And, ye wild sea-birds, hither wheel
  And tell your tale.
Let winds that tossed his raven hair
A message from my lost one bear,--
Some thought of me, a last fond prayer
  Or dying wail!

"Come, with your dreariest truth shut out
The fears that haunt me round about;
O God! I cannot bear this doubt
  That stifles breath.
The worst is better than the dread;
Give me but leave to mourn my dead
Asleep in trust and hope, instead
  Of life in death!"

It might have been the evening breeze
That whispered in the garden trees,
It might have been the sound of seas
  That rose and fell;
But, with her heart, if not her ear,
The old loved voice she seemed to hear:
"I wait to meet thee: be of cheer,
  For all is well!"

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.



I LOVE MY JEAN.


Of a' the airts[3] the wind can blaw,
  I dearly like the west;
For there the bonnie lassie lives,
  The lassie I lo'e best.
There wild woods grow, and rivers row,
  And monie a hill's between;
But day and night my fancy's flight
  Is ever wi' my Jean.

I see her in the dewy flowers,
  I see her sweet and fair;
I hear her in the tunefu' birds,
  I hear her charm the air;
There's not a bonnie flower that springs
  By fountain, shaw, or green;
There's not a bonnie bird that sings,
  But minds me of my Jean.

ROBERT BURNS.

  [3] The points of the compass.



JEANIE MORRISON.


I've wandered east, I've wandered west,
  Through mony a weary way;
But never, never can forget
  The luve o' life's young day!
The fire that's blawn on Beltane e'en
  May weel be black gin Yule;
But blacker fa' awaits the heart
  Where first fond luve grows cule.

O dear, dear Jeanie Morrison,
  The thochts o' bygane years
Still fling their shadows ower my path,
  And blind my een wi' tears:
They blind my een wi' saut, saut tears,
  And sair and sick I pine,
As memory idly summons up
  The blithe blinks o' langsyne.

'Twas then we luvit ilk ither weel,
  'Twas then we twa did part;
Sweet time--sad time! twa bairns at scule,
  Twa bairns, and but ae heart!
'Twas then we sat on ae laigh bink,
  To leir ilk ither lear;
And tones and looks and smiles were shed,
  Remembered evermair.

I wonder, Jeanie, aften yet,
  When sitting on that bink,
Cheek touchin' cheek, loof locked in loof,
  What our wee heads could think.
When baith bent doun ower ae braid page,
  Wi' ae buik on our knee,
Thy lips were on thy lesson, but
  My lesson was in thee.

O, mind ye how we hung our heads,
  How cheeks brent red wi' shame,
Whene'er the scule-weans, laughin', said
  We cleeked thegither hame?
And mind ye o' the Saturdays,
  (The scule then skail't at noon,)
When we ran off to speel the braes,--
  The broomy braes o' June?

My head rins round and round about,--
  My heart flows like a sea,
As ane by ane the thochts rush back
  O' scule-time, and o' thee.
O mornin' life! O mornin' luve!
  O lichtsome days and lang,
When hinnied hopes around our hearts
  Like simmer blossoms sprang!

O, mind ye, luve, how aft we left
  The deavin', dinsome toun,
To wander by the green burnside,
  And hear its waters croon?
The simmer leaves hung ower our heads,
  The flowers burst round our feet,
And in the gloamin' o' the wood
  The throssil whusslit sweet;

The throssil whusslit in the woods,
  The burn sang to the trees,--
And we, with nature's heart in tune,
  Concerted harmonies;
And on the knowe abune the burn,
  For hours thegither sat
In the silentness o' joy, till baith
  Wi' very gladness grat.

Ay, ay, dear Jeanie Morrison,
  Tears trickled doun your cheek
Like dew-beads on a rose, yet nane
  Had ony power to speak!
That was a time, a blessed time,
  When hearts were fresh and young,
When freely gushed all feelings forth,
  Unsyllabled--unsung!

I marvel, Jeanie Morrison,
  Gin I hae been to thee
As closely twined wi' earliest thochts
  As ye hae been to me?
O, tell me gin their music fills
  Thine ear as it does mine!
O, say gin e'er your heart grows grit
  Wi' dreamings o' langsyne?

I've wandered east, I've wandered west,
  I've borne a weary lot;
But in my wanderings, far or near,
  Ye never were forgot.
The fount that first burst frae this heart
  Still travels on its way;
And channels deeper, as it rins,
  The luve o' life's young day.

O dear, dear Jeanie Morrison,
  Since we were sindered young
I've never seen your face nor heard
  The music o' your tongue;
But I could hug all wretchedness,
  And happy could I dee,
Did I but ken your heart still dreamed
  O' bygane days and me!

WILLIAM MOTHERWELL.



O, SAW YE BONNIE LESLIE?


O, saw ye bonnie Leslie
  As she gaed o'er the border?
She's gane, like Alexander,
  To spread her conquests farther.

To see her is to love her,
  And love but her forever;
For nature made her what she is,
  And ne'er made sic anither!

Thou art a queen, fair Leslie,
  Thy subjects we, before thee;
Thou art divine, fair Leslie,
  The hearts o' men adore thee.

The deil he could na scaith thee,
  Or aught that wad belang thee;
He'd look into thy bonnie face,
  And say, "I canna wrang thee!"

The Powers aboon will tent thee;
  Misfortune sha' na steer[4] thee;
Thou'rt like themselves sae lovely
  That ill they 'll ne'er let near thee.

Return again, fair Leslie,
  Return to Caledonie!
That we may brag we hae a lass
  There's nane again sae bonnie.

ROBERT BURNS.

  [4] Harm.



THE RUSTIC LAD'S LAMENT IN THE TOWN.

O, wad that my time were owre but,
  Wi' this wintry sleet and snaw,
That I might see our house again,
  I' the bonnie birken shaw!
For this is no my ain life,
  And I peak and pine away
Wi' the thochts o' hame and the young flowers,
  In the glad green month of May.

I used to wauk in the morning
  Wi' the loud sang o' the lark,
And the whistling o' the ploughman lads,
  As they gaed to their wark;
I used to wear the bit young lambs
  Frae the tod and the roaring stream;
But the warld is changed, and a' thing now
  To me seems like a dream.

There are busy crowds around me,
  On ilka lang dull street;
Yet, though sae mony surround me,
  I ken na are I meet:
And I think o' kind kent faces,
  And o' blithe an' cheery days,
When I wandered out wi' our ain folk,
  Out owre the simmer braes.

Waes me, for my heart is breaking!
  I think o' my brither sma',
And on my sister greeting,
  When I cam frae hame awa.
And O, how my mither sobbit,
  As she shook me by the hand,
When I left the door o' our auld house,
  To come to this stranger land.

There's nae hame like our ain hame--
  O, I wush that I were there!
There's nae hame like our ain hame
  To be met wi' onywhere;
And O that I were back again,
  To our farm and fields sae green;
And heard the tongues o' my ain folk,
  And were what I hae been!

DAVID MACBETH MOIR.



ABSENCE.


What shall I do with all the days and hours
  That must be counted ere I see thy face?
How shall I charm the interval that lowers
  Between this time and that sweet time of grace?

Shall I in slumber steep each weary sense,
  Weary with longing?--shall I flee away
Into past days, and with some fond pretence
  Cheat myself to forget the present day?

Shall love for thee lay on my soul the sin
  Of casting from me God's great gift of time?
Shall I, these mists of memory locked within,
  Leave and forget life's purposes sublime?

O, how or by what means may I contrive
  To bring the hour that brings thee back more near?
How may I teach my drooping hope to live
  Until that blessed time, and thou art here?

I'll tell thee; for thy sake I will lay hold
  Of all good aims, and consecrate to thee,

In worthy deeds, each moment that is told
  While thou, beloved one! art far from me.

For thee I will arouse my thoughts to try
  All heavenward flights, all high and holy strains;
For thy dear sake I will walk patiently
  Through these long hours, nor call their minutes pains.

I will this dreary blank of absence make
  A noble task-time; and will therein strive
To follow excellence, and to o'ertake
  More good than I have won since yet I live.

So may this doomed time build up in me
  A thousand graces, which shall thus be thine;
So may my love and longing hallowed be,
  And thy dear thought an influence divine.

FRANCES ANNE KEMBLE.



ROBIN ADAIR.


What's this dull town to me?
    Robin's not near,--
He whom I wished to see,
    Wished for to hear;
Where's all the joy and mirth
Made life a heaven on earth,
O, they're all fled with thee,
    Robin Adair!

What made the assembly shine?
    Robin Adair:
What made the ball so fine?
    Robin was there:
What, when the play was o'er,
What made my heart so sore?
O, it was parting with
  Robin Adair!

But now thou art far from me,
  Robin Adair;
But now I never see
  Robin Adair;
Yet him I loved so well
Still in my heart shall dwell;
O, I can ne'er forget
  Robin Adair!

Welcome on shore again,
  Robin Adair!
Welcome once more again,
  Robin Adair!
I feel thy trembling hand;
Tears in thy eyelids stand,
To greet thy native land,
  Robin Adair!

Long I ne'er saw thee, love,
  Robin Adair;
Still I prayed for thee, love,
  Robin Adair;
When thou wert far at sea,
Many made love to me,
But still I thought on thee,
  Robin Adair.

Come to my heart again,
  Robin Adair;
Never to part again,
  Robin Adair;
And if thou still art true,
I will be constant too,
And will wed none but you,
  Robin Adair!

LADY CAROLINE KEPPEL.



DAISY.


Where the thistle lifts a purple crown
  Six foot out of the turf,
And the harebell shakes on the windy hill--
  O the breath of the distant surf!--

The hills look over on the South,
  And southward dreams the sea;
And, with the sea-breeze hand in hand,
  Came innocence and she.

Where 'mid the gorse the raspberry
  Red for the gatherer springs,
Two children did we stray and talk
  Wise, idle, childish things.

She listened with big-lipped surprise,
  Breast-deep mid flower and spine:
Her skin was like a grape, whose veins
  Run snow instead of wine.

She knew not those sweet words she spake.
  Nor knew her own sweet way;
But there's never a bird, so sweet a song
  Thronged in whose throat that day!

Oh, there were flowers in Storrington
  On the turf and on the sprays;
But the sweetest flower on Sussex hills
  Was the Daisy-flower that day!

Her beauty smoothed earth's furrowed face!
  She gave me tokens three:--
A look, a word of her winsome mouth,
  And a wild raspberry.

A berry red, a guileless look,
  A still word,--strings of sand!
And yet they made my wild, wild heart
  Fly down to her little hand.

For standing artless as the air,
  And candid as the skies,
She took the berries with her hand,
  And the love with her sweet eyes.

The fairest things have fleetest end:
  Their scent survives their close,
But the rose's scent is bitterness
  To him that loved the rose!

She looked a little wistfully,
  Then went her sunshine way:--
The sea's eye had a mist on it,
  And the leaves fell from the day.

She went her unremembering way,
  She went and left in me
The pang of all the partings gone,
  And partings yet to be.

She left me marvelling why my soul
  Was sad that she was glad;
At all the sadness in the sweet,
  The sweetness in the sad.

Still, still I seemed to see her, still
  Look up with soft replies,
And take the berries with her hand,
  And the love with her lovely eyes.

Nothing begins, and nothing ends,
  That is not paid with moan;
For we are born in others' pain,
  And perish in our own.

FRANCIS THOMPSON.



SONG OF EGLA.


Day, in melting purple dying;
Blossoms, all around me sighing;
Fragrance, from the lilies straying;
Zephyr, with my ringlets playing;
  Ye but waken my distress;
  I am sick of loneliness!

Thou, to whom I love to hearken,
Come, ere night around me darken;
Though thy softness but deceive me,
Say thou'rt true, and I'll believe thee;
  Veil, if ill, thy soul's intent,
  Let me think it innocent!

Save thy toiling, spare thy treasure;
All I ask is friendship's pleasure;
Let the shining ore lie darkling,--
Bring no gem in lustre sparkling;
  Gifts and gold are naught to me,
  I would only look on thee!

Tell to thee the high-wrought feeling,
Ecstasy but in revealing;
Paint to thee the deep sensation,
Rapture in participation;
  Yet but torture, if comprest
  In a lone, unfriended breast.

Absent still! Ah! come and bless me!
Let these eyes again caress thee.
Once in caution, I could fly thee;
Now, I nothing could deny thee.
  In a look if death there be,
  Come, and I will gaze on thee!

MARIA GOWEN BROOKS (_Maria del Occidente_).



WHAT AILS THIS HEART O' MINE?


What ails this heart o' mine?
  What ails this watery ee?
What gars me a' turn pale as death
  When I take leave o' thee?
Whea thou art far awa',
  Thou'lt dearer grow to me;
But change o' place and change o' folk
  May gar thy fancy jee.

When I gae out at e'en,
  Or walk at morning air,
Ilk rustling bush will seem to say
  I used to meet thee there:
Then I'll sit down and cry,
  And live aneath the tree,
And when a leaf fa's i' my lap,
  I'll ca't a word frae thee.

I'll hie me to the bower
  That thou wi' roses tied,
And where wi' mony a blushing bud
  I strove myself to hide.
I'll doat on ilka spot
  Where I ha'e been wi' thee;
And ca' to mind some kindly word
  By ilka burn and tree.

SUSANNA BLAMIRE.



LOVE'S MEMORY.

     FROM "ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL," ACT I. SC. I.


I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. It were all one,
That I should love a bright particular star,
And think to wed it, he is so above me:
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. 'Twas pretty, though a plague,
To see him every hour; to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our heart's table,--heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favor:
But now he's gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his relics.

SHAKESPEARE.



ABSENCE.


When I think on the happy days
  I spent wi' you, my dearie;
And now what lands between us lie,
  How can I be but eerie!

How slow ye move, ye heavy hours,
  As ye were wae and weary!
It was na sae ye glinted by
  When I was wi' my dearie.

ANONYMOUS.



THINKIN' LONG.


Oh thinkin' long's the weary work!
It breaks my heart from dawn
Till all the wee, wee, friendly stars
Come out at dayli'gone.
An' thinkin' long's the weary work,
When I must spin and spin,
To drive the fearsome fancies out,
An' hold the hopeful in!

Ah, sure my lad is far away!
My lad who left our glen
When from the soul of Ireland came
A call for fightin' men;
I miss his gray eyes glancin' bright,
I miss his liltin' song,
And that is why, the lonesome day,
I'm always thinkin' long.

May God's kind angels guard him
When the fray is fierce and grim,
And blunt the point of every sword
That turns its hate on him.
Where round the torn yet dear green flag
The brave and lovin' throng--
But the lasses of Glenwherry smile
At me for thinkin' long.

ANNA MAC MANUS (_Ethna Carbery_).



"TEARS, IDLE TEARS."

     FROM "THE PRINCESS."


  Tears, idle tears, I know not what they mean,
Tears from the depth of some divine despair
Rise in the heart, and gather to the eyes,
In looking on the happy autumn fields,
And thinking of the days that are no more.
Fresh as the first beam glittering on a sail,
That brings our friends up from the under world;
Sad as the last which reddens over one
That sinks with all we love below the verge,--
So sad, so fresh, the days that are no more.

  Ah, sad and strange as in dark summer dawns
The earliest pipe of half-awakened birds
To dying ears, when unto dying eyes
The casement slowly grows a glimmering square;
So sad, so strange, the days that are no more.

  Dear as remembered kisses after death,
And sweet as those by hopeless fancy feigned
On lips that are for others; deep as love,
Deep as first love and wild with all regret,--
O Death in Life, the days that are no more.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



THE OLD FAMILIAR FACES.


I have had playmates, I have had companions,
In my days of childhood, in my joyful school-days;
All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

I have been laughing, I have been carousing,
Drinking late, sitting late, with my bosom cronies;
All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

I loved a Love once, fairest among women:
Closed are her doors on me, I must not see her,--
All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.
I have a friend, a kinder friend has no man:
Like an ingrate, I left my friend abruptly;
Left him, to muse on the old familiar faces.

Ghost-like I paced round the haunts of my childhood,
Earth seemed a desert I was bound to traverse,
Seeking to find the old familiar faces.

Friend of my bosom, thou more than a brother,
Why wert not thou born in my father's dwelling?
So might we talk of the old familiar faces.

How some they have died, and some they have left me,
And some are taken from me; all are departed;
All, all are gone, the old familiar faces.

CHARLES LAMB.



COME TO ME, DEAREST.


Come to me, dearest, I'm lonely without thee,
Daytime and night-time, I'm thinking about thee;
Night-time and daytime, in dreams I behold thee;
Unwelcome the waking which ceases to fold thee.
Come to me, darling, my sorrows to lighten,
Come in thy beauty to bless and to brighten;
Come in thy womanhood, meekly and lowly,
Come in thy lovingness, queenly and holy.

Swallows will flit round the desolate ruin,
Telling of spring and its joyous renewing;
And thoughts of thy love, and its manifold treasure,
Are circling my heart with a promise of pleasure.
O Spring of my spirit, O May of my bosom,
Shine out on my soul, till it bourgeon and blossom;
The waste of my life has a rose-root within it,
And thy fondness alone to the sunshine can win it.

Figure that moves like a song through the even;
Features lit up by a reflex of heaven;
Eyes like the skies of poor Erin, our mother,
Where shadow and sunshine are chasing each other;
Smiles coming seldom, but childlike and simple,
Planting in each rosy cheek a sweet dimple;--
thanks to the Saviour, that even thy seeming
Is left to the exile to brighten his dreaming.

You have been glad when you knew I was gladdened;
Dear, are you sad now to hear I am saddened?
Our hearts ever answer in tune and in time, love,
As octave to octave, and rhyme unto rhyme, love:
I cannot weep but your tears will be flowing,
You cannot smile but my cheek will be glowing;
I would not die without you at my side, love,
You will not linger when I shall have died, love.

Come to me, dear, ere I die of my sorrow,
Rise on my gloom like the sun of to-morrow;
Strong, swift, and fond as the words which I speak, love,
With a song on your lip and a smile on your cheek, love.
Come, for my heart in your absence is weary,--
Haste, for my spirit is sickened and dreary,--
Come to the arms which alone should caress thee.
Come to the heart that is throbbing to press thee!

JOSEPH BRENAN.



THE WIFE TO HER HUSBAND.


Linger not long. Home is not home without thee:
  Its dearest tokens do but make me mourn.
O, let its memory, like a chain about thee,
  Gently compel and hasten thy return!

Linger not long. Though crowds should woo thy staying,
  Bethink thee, can the mirth of thy friends, though dear,
Compensate for the grief thy long delaying
  Costs the fond heart that sighs to have thee here?

Linger not long. How shall I watch thy coming,
  As evening shadows stretch o'er moor and dell;
When the wild bee hath ceased her busy humming,
  And silence hangs on all things like a spell!

How shall I watch for thee, when fears grow stronger,
As night grows dark and darker on the hill!
How shall I weep, when I can watch no longer!
  Ah! art thou absent, art thou absent still?

Yet I shall grieve not, though the eye that seeth me
  Gazeth through tears that makes its splendor dull;
For oh! I sometimes fear when thou art with me,
  My cup of happiness is all too full.

Haste, haste thee home unto thy mountain dwelling,
  Haste, as a bird unto its peaceful nest!
Haste, as a skiff, through tempests wide and swelling,
  Flies to its haven of securest rest!

ANONYMOUS.



MY OLD KENTUCKY HOME.

     NEGRO SONG.


The sun shines bright on our old Kentucky home;
  'Tis summer, the darkeys are gay;
The corn top's ripe and the meadow's in the bloom,
  While the birds make music all the day;
The young folks roll on the little cabin floor,
  All merry, all happy, all bright;
By'm by hard times comes a knockin' at the door,--
  Then, my old Kentucky home, good night!

CHORUS.

_Weep no more, my lady; O, weep no more to-day!
We'll sing one song for the old Kentucky home,
  For our old Kentucky home far away._

They hunt no more for the possum and the coon,
  On the meadow, the hill, and the shore;
They sing no more by the glimmer of the moon,
  On the bench by the old cabin door;
The day goes by, like the shadow o'er the heart,
  With sorrow where all was delight;
The time has come, when the darkeys have to part,
  Then, my old Kentucky home, good night!

    _Weep no more, my lady_, etc.

The head must bow, and the back will have to bend,
  Wherever the darkey may go;
A few more days, and the troubles all will end,
  In the field where the sugar-canes grow;
A few more days to tote the weary load,
  No matter, it will never be light;
A few more days till we totter on the road,
  Then, my old Kentucky home, good night!

_Weep no more, my lady; O, weep no more to-day!
We'll sing one song for the old Kentucky home,
  For our old Kentucky home far away._

STEPHEN COLLINS FOSTER.



OLD FOLKS AT HOME.


Way down upon de Swanee Ribber,
  Far, far away,
Dere's wha my heart is turning ebber,
  Dere's wha de old folks stay.
All up and down de whole creation
  Sadly I roam,
Still longing for de old plantation,
  And for de old folks at home.

    _All de world am sad and dreary,
      Ebery where I roam;
    Oh, darkeys, how my heart grows weary,
      Far from de old folks at home!_

All round de little farm I wandered
  When I was young,
Den many happy days I squandered,
  Many de songs I sung.
When I was playing wid my brudder
  Happy was I;
Oh, take me to my kind old mudder!
  Dere let me live and die.

One little hut among de bushes,
  One dat I love,
Still sadly to my memory rushes,
  No matter where I rove.
When will I see de bees a-humming
  All round de comb?
When will I hear de banjo tumming,
  Down in my good old home?

    _All de world am sad and dreary,
      Ebery where I roam;
    Oh, darkeys, how my heart grows weary,
      Far from de old folks at home!_

STEPHEN COLLINS FOSTER.



THE PRESENT GOOD.

     FROM "THE TASK," BOOK VI.


  Not to understand a treasure's worth
Till time has stol'n away the slighted good,
Is cause of half the poverty we feel,
And makes the world the wilderness it is.

WILLIAM COWPER.

       *       *       *       *       *




III. ADVERSITY.



MAN.


In his own image the Creator made,
  His own pure sunbeam quickened thee, O man!
  Thou breathing dial! since the day began
The present hour was ever marked with shade!

WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR.



THE WORLD.


The World's a bubble, and the Life of Man
        Less than a span:
In his conception wretched, from the womb,
        So to the tomb;
Curst from his cradle, and brought up to years
        With cares and fears.
Who then to frail mortality shall trust,
But limns on water, or but writes in dust.

Yet whilst with sorrow here we live opprest,
        What life is best?
Courts are but only superficial schools
        To dandle fools:
The rural parts are turned into a den
    Of savage men:
And where's a city from foul vice so free,
But may be termed the worst of all the three?

Domestic cares afflict the husband's bed,
    Or pains his head:
Those that live single, take it for a curse,
    Or do things worse:
Some would have children: those that have them, moan
    Or wish them gone:
What is it, then, to have or have no wife,
But single thraldom, or a double strife?

Our own affection still at home to please
    Is a disease:
To cross the seas to any foreign soil,
    Peril and toil:
Wars with their noise affright us; when they cease,
    We are worse in peace;--
What then remains, but that we still should cry
For being born, or, being born, to die?

FRANCIS, LORD BACON.



MOAN, MOAN, YE DYING GALES.


Moan, moan, ye dying gales!
The saddest of your tales
  Is not so sad as life;
Nor have you e'er began
A theme so wild as man,
  Or with such sorrow rife.

Fall, fall, thou withered leaf!
Autumn sears not like grief,
  Nor kills such lovely flowers;
More terrible the storm,
More mournful the deform,
  When dark misfortune lowers.

Hush! hush! thou trembling lyre,
Silence, ye vocal choir,
  And thou, mellifluous lute,
For man soon breathes his last,
And all his hope is past,
  And all his music mute.

Then, when the gale is sighing,
And when the leaves are dying,
  And when the song is o'er,
O, let us think of those
Whose lives are lost in woes,
  Whose cup of grief runs o'er.

HENRY NEELE.



THE VANITY OF THE WORLD.


False world, thou ly'st: thou canst not lend
    The least delight:
Thy favors cannot gain a friend,
    They are so slight:
Thy morning pleasures make an end
    To please at night:
Poor are the wants that thou supply'st,
And yet thou vaunt'st, and yet thou vy'st
With heaven: fond earth, thou boasts; false world, thou ly'st.

Thy babbling tongue tells golden tales
    Of endless treasure;
Thy bounty offers easy sales
    Of lasting pleasure;
Thou ask'st the conscience what she ails,
    And swear'st to ease her;
There's none can want where thou supply'st;
There's none can give where thou deny'st.
Alas! fond world, thou boasts; false world, thou ly'st.

What well-advised ear regards
    What earth can say?
Thy words are gold, but thy regards
    Are painted clay:
Thy cunning can but pack the cards,
    Thou canst not play:
Thy game at weakest, still thou vy'st;
If seen, and then revy'd, deny'st:
Thou art not what thou seem'st; false world, thou ly'st.

Thy tinsel bosom seems a mint
    Of new-coined treasure;
A paradise, that has no stint,
    No change, no measure;
A painted cask, but nothing in 't,
  Nor wealth, nor pleasure:
Vain earth! that falsely thus comply'st
With man; vain man! that thou rely'st
On earth; vain man, thou dot'st; vain earth, thou ly'st.

What mean dull souls, in this high measure,
  To haberdash
In earth's base wares, whose greatest treasure
  Is dross and trash?
The height of whose enchanting pleasure
  Is but a flash?
Are these the goods that thou supply'st
Us mortals with? Are these the high'st?
Can these bring cordial peace? false world, thou ly'st.

FRANCIS QUARLES.



BLOW, BLOW, THOU WINTER WIND.

     FROM "AS YOU LIKE IT," ACT II. SC. 7.


Blow, blow, thou winter wind,
Thou art not so unkind
  As man's ingratitude;
Thy tooth is not so keen,
Because thou art not seen,
  Although thy breath be rude.
Heigh-ho! sing heigh-ho! unto the green holly;
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
  Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
    This life is most jolly!

Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky,
Thou dost not bite so nigh
  As benefits forgot:
Though thou the waters warp,
Thy sting is not so sharp
  As friend remembered not.
Heigh-ho! sing heigh-ho! unto the green holly:
Most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly:
  Then, heigh-ho, the holly!
    This life is most jolly!

SHAKESPEARE.



THE WAIL OF PROMETHEUS BOUND.

     FROM "PROMETHEUS."


O holy AEther, and swift-winged Winds,
And River-wells, and laughter innumerous
Of yon Sea-waves! Earth, mother of us all,
And all-viewing cyclic Sun, I cry on you,--
Behold me a god, what I endure from gods!
  Behold, with throe on throe,
  How, wasted by this woe,
I wrestle down the myriad years of Time!
  Behold, how fast around me
The new King of the happy ones sublime
Has flung the chain he forged, has shamed and bound me!
Woe, woe! to-day's woe and the coming morrow's
  I cover with one groan. And where is found me
    A limit to these sorrows?
  And yet what word do I say? I have fore-known
  Clearly all things that should be; nothing done
  Comes sudden to my soul--and I must bear
  What is ordained with patience, being aware
  Necessity doth front the universe
  With an invincible gesture. Yet this curse
  Which strikes me now, I find it hard to brave
  In silence or in speech. Because I gave
  Honor to mortals, I have yoked my soul
  To this compelling fate. Because I stole
  The secret fount of fire, whose bubbles went
  Over the ferrule's brim, and manward sent
  Art's mighty means and perfect rudiment,
  That sin I expiate in this agony,
  Hung here in fetters, 'neath the blanching sky.
    Ah, ah me! what a sound,
What a fragrance sweeps up from a pinion unseen
Of a god, or a mortal, or nature between,
Sweeping up to this rock where the earth has her bound,
To have sight of my pangs, or some guerdon obtain--
Lo, a god in the anguish, a god in the chain!
    The god Zeus hateth sore,
    And his gods hate again,
As many as tread on his glorified floor,
Because I loved mortals too much evermore.
Alas me! what a murmur and motion I hear,
  As of birds flying near!
  And the air undersings
  The light stroke of their wings--
And all life that approaches I wait for in fear.

From the Greek of AESCHYLUS.
Translation of ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



SAMSON ON HIS BLINDNESS.

     FROM "SAMSON AGONISTES."


O loss of sight, of thee I must complain!
Blind among enemies, O, worse than chains,
Dungeon, or beggary, or decrepit age!
Light, the prime work of God, to me is extinct,
And all her various objects of delight
Annulled, which might in part my grief have eased.
Inferior to the vilest now become
Of man or worm; the vilest here excel me:
They creep, yet see; I, dark in light, exposed
To daily fraud, contempt, abuse, and wrong,
Within doors or without, still as a fool,
In power of others, never in my own;
Scarce half I seem to live, dead more than half.
O dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of moon,
Irrecoverably dark, total eclipse,
Without all hope of day!

MILTON.



LINES.

[Written in the Tower, the night before his probably unjust execution
for treason.]


My prime of youth is but a frost of cares,
  My feast of joy is but a dish of pain,
My crop of corn is but a field of tares,
  And all my goodes is but vain hope of gain.
The day is fled, and yet I saw no sun;
And now I live, and now my life is done!

My spring is past, and yet it hath not sprung,
  The fruit is dead, and yet the leaves are green,
My youth is past, and yet I am but young,
  I saw the world, and yet I was not seen.
My thread is cut, and yet it is not spun;
And now I live, and now my life is done!

I sought for death and found it in the wombe,
  I lookt for life, and yet it was a shade,
I trade the ground, and knew it was my tombe,
  And now I die, and now I am but made.
The glass is full, and yet my glass is run;

And now I live, and now my life is done!

CHEDIOCK TICHEBORNE.



HENCE, ALL YE VAIN DELIGHTS.

     FROM "THE NICE VALOUR," ACT III. SC. 3.


Hence, all ye vain delights,
As short as are the nights
  Wherein you spend your folly!
  There's naught in this life sweet,
  If man were wise to see't
    But only melancholy,
    O, sweetest melancholy!

Welcome, folded arms, and fixed eyes,
A sigh that piercing mortifies,
A look that's fastened to the ground,
A tongue chained up without a sound!

Fountain-heads and pathless groves,
Places which pale passion loves!
Moonlight walks, when all the fowls
Are warmly housed save bats and owls!
A midnight bell, a parting groan!
These are the sounds we feed upon;
Then stretch our bones in a still gloomy valley:
Nothing's so dainty sweet as lovely melancholy.

JOHN FLETCHER.



THE FALL OF CARDINAL WOLSEY.

     FROM "KING HENRY VIII.," ACT III. SC. 2.


Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Let's dry our eyes: and thus far hear me, Cromwell;
And--when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull, cold marble, where no mention
Of me more must be heard of--say, I taught thee,
Say, Wolsey--that once trod the ways of glory,
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honor--
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;
A sure and safe one, though thy master missed it.
Mark but my fall, and that that ruined me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
The image of his Maker, hope to win by 't?
Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate thee:
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not:
Let all the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's,
Thy God's, and truth's; then if thou fall'st, O Cromwell!
Thou fall'st a blessed martyr.
Serve the king; and--pr'ythee, lead me in:
There take an inventory of all I have,
To the last penny; 'tis the king's: my robe,
And my integrity to heaven, is all
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my king, he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies!

       *       *       *       *       *

Farewell, a long farewell, to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hope; to-morrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honors thick upon him:
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost;
And--when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a ripening--nips his root,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory;
But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
At length broke under me; and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must forever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye:
I feel my heart new opened. O, how wretched
Is that poor man that hangs on princes' favors!
There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have:
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.

SHAKESPEARE.



THE APPROACH OF AGE.

     FROM "TALES OF THE HALL."


Six years had passed, and forty ere the six,
When Time began to play his usual tricks:
The locks once comely in a virgin's sight,
Locks of pure brown, displayed the encroaching white;
The blood, once fervid, now to cool began,
And Time's strong pressure to subdue the man.
I rode or walked as I was wont before,
But now the bounding spirit was no more;
A moderate pace would now my body heat,
A walk of moderate length distress my feet.
I showed my stranger guest those hills sublime,
But said, "The view is poor, we need not climb."
At a friend's mansion I began to dread
The cold neat parlor and the gay glazed bed;
At home I felt a more decided taste,
And must have all things in my order placed.
I ceased to hunt; my horses pleased me less,--
My dinner more; I learned to play at chess.
I took my dog and gun, but saw the brute
Was disappointed that I did not shoot.
My morning walks I now could bear to lose,
And blessed the shower that gave me not to choose.
In fact, I felt a languor stealing on;
The active arm, the agile hand, were gone;
Small daily actions into habits grew,
And new dislike to forms and fashions new.
I loved my trees in order to dispose;
I numbered peaches, looked how stocks arose;
Told the same story oft,--in short, began to prose.

GEORGE CRABBE.



STANZAS

     WRITTEN IN DEJECTION NEAR NAPLES.


  The sun is warm, the sky is clear,
  The waves are dancing fast and bright,
  Blue isles and snowy mountains wear
  The purple noon's transparent light:
  The breath of the moist air is light
  Around its unexpanded buds;
  Like many a voice of one delight,--
  The winds', the birds', the ocean-floods',--
The City's voice itself is soft like Solitude's.

  I see the Deep's untrampled floor
  With green and purple sea-weeds strown;
  I see the waves upon the shore
  Like light dissolved in star-showers thrown:
  I sit upon the sands alone;
  The lightning of the noontide ocean
  Is flashing round me, and a tone
  Arises from its measured motion,--
How sweet, did any heart now share in my emotion!

  Alas! I have nor hope nor health,
  Nor peace within nor calm around,
  Nor that Content surpassing wealth
  The sage in meditation found,
  And walked with inward glory crowned,--
  Nor fame, nor power, nor love, nor leisure.
  Others I see whom these surround;
  Smiling they live, and call life pleasure;
To me that cup has been dealt in another measure.

  Yet now despair itself is mild
  Even as the winds and waters are;
  I could lie down like a tired child,
  And weep away the life of care
  Which I have borne, and yet must bear,
  Till death like sleep might steal on me,
  And I might feel in the warm air
  My cheek grow cold, and hear the sea
Breathe o'er my dying brain its last monotony.

  Some might lament that I were cold,
  As I, when this sweet day is gone,
  Which my lost heart, too soon grown old,
  Insults with this untimely moan;
  They might lament,--for I am one
  Whom men love not,--and yet regret,
  Unlike this day, which, when the sun
  Shall on its stainless glory set,
Will linger, though enjoyed, like joy in memory yet.

PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY.



ODE TO A NIGHTINGALE.

[Written in the spring of 1819, when suffering from physical depression,
the precursor of his death, which happened soon after.]


My heart aches, and a drowsy numbness pains
  My sense, as though of hemlock I had drunk,
Or emptied some dull opiate to the drains
  One minute past, and Lethe-wards had sunk:
'Tis not through envy of thy happy lot,
  But being too happy in thy happiness,--
    That thou, light-winged Dryad of the trees,
      In some melodious plot
  Of beechen green, and shadows numberless,
    Singest of Summer in full-throated ease.

O for a draught of vintage, that hath been
  Cooled a long age in the deep delved earth,

Tasting of Flora and the country-green,
  Dance, and Provencal song, and sunburnt mirth!
O for a beaker full of the warm South,
  Full of the true, the blushful Hippocrene,
    With beaded bubbles winking at the brim,
      And purple-stained mouth,--
  That I might drink, and leave the world unseen,
    And with thee fade away into the forest dim:

Fade far away, dissolve, and quite forget
  What thou among the leaves hast never known,
The weariness, the fever, and the fret
  Here, where men sit and hear each other groan;
Where palsy shakes a few, sad, last gray hairs,
  Where youth grows pale, and spectre-thin, and dies;
    Where but to think is to be full of sorrow
      And leaden-eyed despairs,
  Where Beauty cannot keep her lustrous eyes,
    Or new Love pine at them beyond to-morrow.

Away! away! for I will fly to thee,
  Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,
But on the viewless wings of Poesy,
  Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:
Already with thee! tender is the night,
  And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,
    Clustered around by all her starry Fays;
      But here there is no light,
  Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown
  Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy ways.

I cannot see what flowers are at my feet,
  Nor what soft incense hangs upon the boughs,
  But in embalmed darkness, guess each sweet
  Wherewith the seasonable month endows
The grass, the thicket, and the fruit-tree wild;
  White hawthorn, and the pastoral eglantine;
    Fast-fading violets covered up in leaves;
      And mid-May's eldest child,
  The coming musk-rose, full of dewy wine,
    The murmurous haunt of flies on summer eves.
Darkling I listen; and for many a time
  I have been half in love with easeful Death.
Called him soft names in many a mused rhyme,
  To take into the air my quiet breath;
Now, more than ever, seems it rich to die,
  To cease upon the midnight, with no pain.
    While thou art pouring forth thy soul abroad,
      In such an ecstasy!--
  Still wouldst thou sing, and I have ears in vain--
    To thy high requiem become a sod.

Thou wast not born for death, immortal Bird!
  No hungry generations tread thee down;
The voice I hear this passing night was heard
  In ancient days by emperor and clown:
Perhaps the self-same song that found a path
  Through the sad heart of Ruth, when, sick for home,
  She stood in tears amid the alien corn;
      The same that oft-times hath
  Charmed magic casements opening on the foam
    Of perilous seas, in faery lands forlorn.

Forlorn! the very word is like a bell,
  To toll me back from thee to my sole self!
Adieu! the Fancy cannot cheat so well
  As she is famed to do, deceiving elf.
Adieu! adieu! thy plaintive anthem fades
  Past the near meadows, over the still stream,
    Up the hillside; and now 'tis buried deep
      In the next valley-glades:
  Was it a vision or a waking dream?
    Fled is that music:--do I wake or sleep?

JOHN KEATS.



PERISHED.

     CATSKILL MOUNTAIN HOUSE.


Wave after wave of greenness rolling down
From mountain top to base, a whispering sea
Of affluent leaves through which the viewless breeze
  Murmurs mysteriously.

And towering up amid the lesser throng,
A giant oak, so desolately grand,
Stretches its gray imploring arms to heaven
  In agonized demand.

Smitten by lightning from a summer sky,
Or bearing in its heart a slow decay,
What matter, since inexorable fate
  Is pitiless to slay.

Ah, wayward soul, hedged in and clothed about,
Doth not thy life's lost hope lift up its head,
And, dwarfing present joys, proclaim aloud,--
  "Look on me, I am dead!"

MARY LOUISE RITTER.



BYRON'S LATEST VERSES.

     "_On this day I completed my thirty-sixth year._"
        --MISSOLONGHI, JANUARY 23, 1824.


'Tis time this heart should be unmoved,
  Since others it has ceased to move:
Yet, though I cannot be beloved,
    Still let me love!

My days are in the yellow leaf,
  The flowers and fruits of love are gone:
The worm, the canker, and the grief,
    Are mine alone.

The fire that in my bosom preys
  Is like to some volcanic isle;
No torch is kindled at its blaze,--
    A funeral pile.

The hope, the fear, the jealous care,
  The exalted portion of the pain
And power of love, I cannot share,
    But wear the chain.

But 'tis not _thus_,--and 'tis not _here_,
  Such thoughts should shake my soul, nor _now_,
Where glory decks the hero's bier,
    Or binds his brow.

The sword, the banner, and the field,
  Glory and Greece about us see;
The Spartan borne upon his shield
    Was not more free.

Awake!--not Greece,--she is awake!
  Awake my spirit! think through whom
Thy life-blood tastes its parent lake,
    And then strike home!

Tread those reviving passions down,
  Unworthy manhood! unto thee
Indifferent should the smile or frown
    Of beauty be.

If thou regrett'st thy youth,--why live?
  The land of honorable death
Is here:--up to the field, and give
    Away thy breath!

Seek out--less often sought than found--
  A soldier's grave, for thee the best;
Then look around, and choose thy ground,
    And take thy rest!

LORD BYRON.



A DOUBTING HEART.


Where are the swallows fled?
    Frozen and dead
Perchance upon some bleak and stormy shore.
    O doubting heart!
  Far over purple seas
  They wait, in sunny ease,
  The balmy southern breeze
To bring them to their northern homes once more.

Why must the flowers die?
    Prisoned they lie
In the cold tomb, heedless of tears or rain.
    O doubting heart!
They only sleep below
  The soft white ermine snow
  While winter winds shall blow,
To breathe and smile upon you soon again.

The sun has hid its rays
    These many days;
Will dreary hours never leave the earth?
    O doubting heart!
  The stormy clouds on high
  Veil the same sunny sky
  That soon, for spring is nigh,
Shall wake the summer into golden mirth.

Fair hope is dead, and light
    Is quenched in night;
What sound can break the silence of despair?
    O doubting heart!
  The sky is overcast,
  Yet stars shall rise at last,
  Brighter for darkness past;
And angels' silver voices stir the air.

ADELAIDE ANNE PROCTER.



THE VOICELESS.


We count the broken lyres that rest
  Where the sweet wailing singers slumber,
But o'er their silent sister's breast
  The wild-flowers who will stoop to number?
A few can touch the magic string,
  And noisy Fame is proud to win them:
Alas for those that never sing,
  But die with all their music in them!

Nay grieve not for the dead alone
  Whose song has told their hearts' sad story,--
Weep for the voiceless, who have known
  The cross without the crown of glory!
Not where Leucadian breezes sweep
  O'er Sappho's memory-haunted billow,
But where the glistening night-dews weep
  On nameless sorrow's churchyard pillow.

O hearts that break and give no sign
  Save whitening lip and fading tresses,
Till Death pours out his longed-for wine
  Slow-dropped from Misery's crushing presses,--
If singing breath or echoing chord
  To every hidden pang were given,
What endless melodies were poured,
  As sad as earth, as sweet as heaven!

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.



A LAMENT.


O World! O Life! O Time!
On whose last steps I climb,
  Trembling at that where I had stood before;
When will return the glory of your prime?
  No more,--O nevermore!

Out of the day and night
A joy has taken flight:
  Fresh spring, and summer, and winter hoar
Move my faint heart with grief, but with delight
  No more,--O nevermore!

PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY.



"WHAT CAN AN OLD MAN DO BUT DIE?"


  Spring it is cheery,
  Winter is dreary,
Green leaves hang, but the brown must fly;
  When he's forsaken,
  Withered and shaken,
What can an old man do but die?

  Love will not clip him,
  Maids will not lip him,
Maud and Marian pass him by;
  Youth it is sunny,
  Age has no honey,--
What can an old man do but die?

  June it was jolly,
  O for its folly!
A dancing leg and a laughing eye!
  Youth may be silly,
  Wisdom is chilly,--
What can an old man do but die?

  Friends they are scanty,
  Beggars are plenty,
If he has followers, I know why;
  Gold's in his clutches
  (Buying him crutches!)--
What can an old man do but die?

THOMAS HOOD.



OVER THE HILL TO THE POOR-HOUSE.


Over the hill to the poor-house I'm trudgin' my weary way--
I, a woman of seventy, and only a trifle gray--
I, who am smart an' chipper, for all the years I've told,
As many another woman that's only half as old.

Over the hill to the poor-house--I can't quite make it clear!
Over the hill to the poor-house--it seems so horrid queer!
Many a step I've taken a-toilin' to and fro,
But this is a sort of journey I never thought to go.

What is the use of heapin' on me a pauper's shame?
Am I lazy or crazy? am I blind or lame?
True, I am not so supple, nor yet so awful stout;
But charity ain't no favor, if one can live without.

I am willin' and anxious an' ready any day
To work for a decent livin', an' pay my honest way;
For I can earn my victuals, an' more too, I'll be bound,
If anybody only is willin' to have me round.

Once I was young an' han'some--I was, upon my soul--
Once my cheeks was roses, my eyes as black as coal;
And I can't remember, in them days, of hearin' people say,
For any kind of a reason, that I was in their way.

'Tain't no use of boastin', or talkin' over free,
But many a house an' home was open then to me;
Many a ban'some offer I had from likely men,
And nobody ever hinted that I was a burden then.

And when to John I was married, sure he was good and smart,
But he and all the neighbors would own I done my part;
For life was all before me, an' I was young an' strong,
And I worked the best that I could in tryin' to get along.

And so we worked together: and life was hard, but gay,
With now and then a baby for to cheer us on our way;
Till we had half a dozen, an' all growed clean an' neat,
An' went to school like others, an' had enough to eat.

So we worked for the child'rn, and raised 'em every one;
Worked for 'em summer and winter, just as we ought to 've done;
Only perhaps we humored 'em, which some good folks condemn,
But every couple's child'rn 's heap the best to them.

Strange how much we think of our blessed little ones!--
I'd have died for my daughters, I'd have died for my sons;
And God he made that rule of love; but when we're old and gray,
I've noticed it sometimes somehow fails to work the other way.

Strange, another thing: when our boys an' girls was grown,
And when, exceptin' Charley, they'd left us there alone;
When John he nearer an' nearer come, an' dearer seemed to be,
The Lord of Hosts he come one day an' took him away from me.

Still I was bound to struggle, an' never to cringe or fall--
Still I worked for Charley, for Charley was now my all;
And Charley was pretty good to me, with scarce a word or frown,
Till at last he went a-courtin', and brought a wife from town.

She was somewhat dressy, an' hadn't a pleasant smile--
She was quite conceity, and carried a heap o' style;
But if I ever tried to be friends, I did with her, I know;
But she was hard and proud, an' I couldn't make it go.

She had an edication, an' that was good for her;
But when she twitted me on mine, 'twas carryin' things too fur;
An' I told her once, 'fore company (an' it almost made her sick),
That I never swallowed a grammar, or 'et a rithmetic.

So 'twas only a few days before the thing was done--
They was a family of themselves, and I another one;
And a very little cottage one family will do,
But I never have seen a house that was big enough for two.

An' I could never speak to suit her, never could please her eye,
An' it made me independent, an' then I didn't try;
But I was terribly staggered, an' felt it like a blow,
When Charley turned ag'in me, an' told me I could go.

I went to live with Susan, but Susan's house was small,
And she was always a-hintin' how snug it was for us all;
And what with her husband's sisters, and what with child'rn three,
'Twas easy to discover that there wasn't room for me.

An' then I went to Thomas, the oldest son I've got,
For Thomas's buildings'd cover the half of an acre lot;
But all the child'rn was on me--I couldn't stand their sauce--
And Thomas said I needn't think I was comin' there to boss.

An' then I wrote to Rebecca, my girl who lives out West,
And to Isaac, not far from her--some twenty miles at best;
And one of 'em said 'twas too warm there for any one so old,
And t' other had an opinion the climate was too cold.

So they have shirked and slighted me, an' shifted me about--
So they have well-nigh soured me, an' wore my old heart out;
But still I've borne up pretty well, an' wasn't much put down,
Till Charley went to the poor-master, an' put me on the town.

Over the hill to the poor-house--my child'rn dear, good by!
Many a night I've watched you when only God was nigh;
And God'll judge between us; but I will al'ays pray
That you shall never suffer the half I do to-day.

WILL CARLETON.



OLD.


By the wayside, on a mossy stone,
  Sat a hoary pilgrim, sadly musing;
Oft I marked him sitting there alone.
  All the landscape, like a page perusing;
    Poor, unknown,
By the wayside, on a mossy stone.

Buckled knee and shoe, and broad-brimmed hat;
  Coat as ancient as the form 'twas folding;
Silver buttons, queue, and crimped cravat;
  Oaken staff his feeble hand upholding;
    There he sat!
Buckled knee and shoe, and broad-brimmed hat.

Seemed it pitiful he should sit there,
  No one sympathizing, no one heeding,
None to love him for his thin gray hair,
  And the furrows all so mutely pleading
    Age and care:
Seemed it pitiful he should sit there.

It was summer, and we went to school,
  Dapper country lads and little maidens;
Taught the motto of the "Dunce's Stool,"--
  Its grave import still my fancy ladens,--
    "Here's a fool!"
It was summer, and we went to school.

When the stranger seemed to mark our play,
  Some of us were joyous, some sad-hearted,
I remember well, too well, that day!
  Oftentimes the tears unbidden started,
    Would not stay
When the stranger seemed to mark our play.

One sweet spirit broke the silent spell,
  O, to me her name was always Heaven!
She besought him all his grief to tell,
  (I was then thirteen, and she eleven,)
    Isabel!
One sweet spirit broke the silent spell.

"Angel," said he sadly, "I am old;
  Earthly hope no longer hath a morrow;
Yet, why I sit here thou shalt be told."
  Then his eyes betrayed a pearl of sorrow,
    Down it rolled!
"Angel," said he sadly, "I am old.

"I have tottered here to look once more
  On the pleasant scene where I delighted
In the careless, happy days of yore,
  Ere the garden of ray heart was blighted
    To the core:
I have tottered here to look once more.

"All the picture now to me how dear!
  E'en this old gray rock where I am seated,
Is a jewel worth my journey here;
  Ah that such a scene must be completed
    With a tear!
All the picture now to me how dear!

"Old stone school-house! it is still the same;
  There's the very step I so oft mounted;
There's the window creaking in its frame,
  And the notches that I cut and counted
    For the game.
Old stone school-house, it is still the same.

"In the cottage yonder I was born;
  Long my happy home, that humble dwelling;
There the fields of clover, wheat, and corn;
  There the spring with limpid nectar swelling;
    Ah, forlorn!
In the cottage yonder I was born.

"Those two gateway sycamores you see
  Then were planted just so far asunder
That long well-pole from the path to free,
  And the wagon to pass safely under;
    Ninety-three!
Those two gateway sycamores you see.

"There's the orchard where we used to climb
  When my mates and I were boys together,
Thinking nothing of the flight of time,
  Fearing naught but work and rainy weather;
    Past its prime!
There's the orchard where we used to climb.

"There the rude, three-cornered chestnut-rails,
  Bound the pasture where the flocks were grazing
Where, so sly, I used to watch for quails
  In the crops of buckwheat we were raising;
    Traps and trails!
There the rude, three-cornered chestnut-rails.

"There's the mill that ground our yellow grain;
  Pond and river still serenely flowing;
Cot there nestling in the shaded lane,
  Where the lily of my heart was blowing,--
    Mary Jane!
There's the mill that ground our yellow grain.

"There's the gate on which I used to swing,
  Brook, and bridge, and barn, and old red stable;
But alas! no more the morn shall bring
  That dear group around my father's table;
    Taken wing!
There's the gate on which I used to swing.

"I am fleeing,--all I loved have fled.
  Yon green meadow was our place for playing
That old tree can tell of sweet things said
  When around it Jane and I were straying;
    She is dead!
I am fleeing,--all I loved have fled.

"Yon white spire, a pencil on the sky,
  Tracing silently life's changeful story,
So familiar to my dim eye,
  Points me to seven that are now in glory
    There on high!
Yon white spire, a pencil on the sky.

"Oft the aisle of that old church we trod,
  Guided hither by an angel mother;
Now she sleeps beneath its sacred sod;
  Sire and sisters, and my little brother,
    Gone to God!
Oft the aisle of that old church we trod.

"There I heard of Wisdom's pleasant ways;
  Bless the holy lesson!--but, ah, never
Shall I hear again those songs of praise,
  Those sweet voices silent now forever!
    Peaceful days!
There I heard of Wisdom's pleasant ways.

"There my Mary blessed me with her hand
  When our souls drank in the nuptial blessings,
Ere she hastened to the spirit-land,
  Yonder turf her gentle bosom pressing;
    Broken band!
There my Mary blessed me with her hand.

"I have come to see that grave once more,
  And the sacred place where we delighted,
Where we worshipped, in the days of yore,
  Ere the garden of my heart was blighted
    To the care!
I have come to see that grave once more.

"Angel," said he sadly, "I am old;
  Earthly hope no longer hath a morrow,
Now, why I sit here thou hast been told."
  In his eye another pearl of sorrow,
    Down it rolled!
"Angel," said he sadly, "I am old."

By the wayside, on a mossy stone,
  Sat the hoary pilgrim, sadly musing;
Still I marked him sitting there alone,
  All the landscape, like a page, perusing;
    Poor, unknown!
By the wayside, on a mossy stone.

RALPH HOYT.



THE LAST LEAF.


I saw him once before,
As he passed by the door;
  And again
The pavement-stones resound
As he totters o'er the ground
  With his cane.

They say that in his prime,
Ere the pruning-knife of time
  Cut him down,
Not a better man was found
By the crier on his round
  Through the town.

But now he walks the streets,
And he looks at all he meets
  So forlorn;
And he shakes his feeble head,
That it seems as if he said,
  "They are gone."

The mossy marbles rest
On the lips that he had pressed
  In their bloom;
And the names he loved to hear
Have been carved for many a year
  On the tomb.

My grandmamma has said--
Poor old lady! she is dead
  Long ago--
That he had a Roman nose,
And his cheek was like a rose
  In the snow.

But now his nose is thin,
And it rests upon his chin
  Like a staff;
And a crook is in his back,
And the melancholy crack
  In his laugh.

I know it is a sin
For me to sit and grin
  At him here,
But the old three-cornered hat,
And the breeches,--and all that,
  Are so queer!

And if I should live to be
The last leaf upon the tree
  In the spring,
Let them smile, as I do now,
At the old forsaken bough
  Where I cling.

OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.



THE LAST LEAF.

     YA PEREZHIL SVOI ZHELANYA.


I've overlived aspirings,
  My fancies I disdain;
The fruit of hollow-heartedness,
  Sufferings alone remain.

'Neath cruel storms of Fate
  With my crown of bay,
A sad and lonely life I lead,
  Waiting my latest day.

Thus, struck by latter cold
  While howls the wintry wind,
Trembles upon the naked bough
  The last leaf left behind.

From the Russian of ALEKSANDER SERGYEVICH POUSHKIN.
Translation of JOHN POLLEN.



THE OLD VAGABOND.


  Here in the ditch my bones I'll lay;
    Weak, wearied, old, the world I leave.
  "He's drunk," the passing crowd will say
    'T is well, for none will need to grieve.
  Some turn their scornful heads away,
    Some fling an alms in hurrying by;--
  Haste,--'t is the village holyday!
The aged beggar needs no help to die.

  Yes! here, alone, of sheer old age
    I die; for hunger slays not all.
  I hoped my misery's closing page
    To fold within some hospital;
  But crowded thick is each retreat,
    Such numbers now in misery lie.
  Alas! my cradle was the street!
As he was born the aged wretch must die.

  In youth, of workmen, o'er and o'er,
    I've asked, "Instruct me in your trade."
  "Begone!--our business is not more
    Than keeps ourselves,--go, beg!" they said.
  Ye rich, who bade me toil for bread,
    Of bones your tables gave me store,
  Your straw has often made my bed;--
In death I lay no curses at your door.

  Thus poor, I might have turned to theft;--
    No!--better still for alms to pray!
At most, I've plucked some apple, left
    To ripen near the public way,
  Yet weeks and weeks, in dungeons laid
    In the king's name, they let me pine;
  They stole the only wealth I had,--
Though poor and old, the sun, at least, was mine.

  What country has the poor to claim?
    What boots to me your corn and wine,
  Your busy toil, your vaunted fame,
    The senate where your speakers shine?
  Once, when your homes, by war o'erswept,
    Saw strangers battening on your land,
  Like any puling fool, I wept!
The aged wretch was nourished by their hand.

  Mankind! why trod you not the worm,
    The noxious thing, beneath your heel?
  Ah! had you taught me to perform
    Due labor for the common weal!
  Then, sheltered from the adverse wind,
    The worm and ant had learned to grow;
  Ay,--then I might have loved my kind;--
The aged beggar dies your bitter foe!

From the French of PIERRE-JEAN DE BERANGER.



THE BEGGAR.


Pity the sorrows of a poor old man!
  Whose trembling limbs have borne him to your door,
Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
  O, give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.

These tattered clothes my poverty bespeak,
  These hoary locks proclaim my lengthened years;
And many a furrow in my grief-worn cheek
  Has been the channel to a stream of tears.

Yon house, erected on the rising ground,
  With tempting aspect drew me from my road,
For plenty there a residence has found,
  And grandeur a magnificent abode.

(Hard is the fate of the infirm and poor!)
  Here craving for a morsel of their bread,
A pampered menial drove me from the door,
  To seek a shelter in the humble shed.

O, take me to your hospitable dome,
  Keen blows the wind, and piercing is the cold!
Short is my passage to the friendly tomb,
  For I am poor and miserably old.

Should I reveal the source of every grief,
  If soft humanity e'er touched your breast,
Your hands would not withhold the kind relief,
  And tears of pity could not be repressed.

Heaven sends misfortunes,--why should we repine?
  'T is Heaven has brought me to the state you see:
And your condition may be soon like mine,
  The child of sorrow and of misery.

A little farm was my paternal lot,
  Then, like the lark, I sprightly hailed the morn;
But ah! oppression forced me from my cot;
  My cattle died, and blighted was my corn.

My daughter,--once the comfort of my age!
  Lured by a villain from her native home,
Is cast, abandoned, on the world's wild stage,
  And doomed in scanty poverty to roam.

My tender wife,--sweet soother of my care!--
  Struck with sad anguish at the stern decree,
Fell,--lingering fell, a victim to despair,
  And left the world to wretchedness and me.

Pity the sorrows of a poor old man!
  Whose trembling limbs have born him to your door,
  Whose days are dwindled to the shortest span,
  O, give relief, and Heaven will bless your store.

THOMAS MOSS.



A ROUGH RHYME ON A ROUGH MATTER.

     THE ENGLISH GAME LAWS.


The merry brown hares came leaping
  Over, the crest of the hill,
Where the clover and corn lay sleeping,
  Under the moonlight still.
Leaping late and early,
  Till under their bite and their tread,
The swedes, and the wheat, and the barley
  Lay cankered, and trampled, and dead.

A poacher's widow sat sighing
  On the side of the white chalk bank,
Where, under the gloom of fire-woods,
  One spot in the lea throve rank.

She watched a long tuft of clover,
  Where rabbit or hare never ran,
For its black sour haulm covered over
  The blood of a murdered man.

She thought of the dark plantation,
  And the hares, and her husband's blood,
And the voice of her indignation
  Rose up to the throne of God:

"I am long past wailing and whining,
  I have wept too much in my life:
I've had twenty years of pining
  As an English laborer's wife.

"A laborer in Christian England,
  Where they cant of a Saviour's name,
And yet waste men's lives like the vermin's
  For a few more brace of game.

"There's blood on your new foreign shrubs, squire,
  There's blood on your pointer's feet;
There's blood on the game you sell, squire,
  And there's blood on the game you eat.

"You have sold the laboring man, squire,
  Both body and soul to shame,
To pay for your seat in the House, squire,
  And to pay for the feed of your game.

"You made him a poacher yourself, squire,
  When you'd give neither work nor meat,
And your barley-fed hares robbed the garden
  At our starving children's feet;

"When, packed in one reeking chamber,
  Man, maid, mother, and little ones lay;
While the rain pattered in on the rotten bride-bed,
  And the walls let in the day;

"When we lay in the burning fever,
  On the mud of the cold clay floor,
Till you parted us all for three months, squire,
  At the cursed workhouse door.

"We quarrelled like brutes, and who wonders?
  What self-respect could we keep,
Worse housed than your hacks and your pointers,
  Worse fed than your hogs and your sheep?

"Our daughters, with base-born babies,
  Have wandered away in their shame;
If your misses had slept, squire, where they did,
  Your misses might do the same.

"Can your lady patch hearts that are breaking,
  With handfuls of coals and rice,
Or by dealing out flannel and sheeting
  A little below cost price?

"You may tire of the jail and the workhouse,
  And take to allotments and schools,
But you 've run up a debt that will never
  Be repaid us by penny-club rules.

"In the season of shame and sadness,
  In the dark and dreary day.
When scrofula, gout, and madness
  Are eating your race away;

"When to kennels and liveried varlets
  You have cast your daughters' bread,
And, worn out with liquor and harlots,
  Your heir at your feet lies dead;

"When your youngest, the mealy-mouthed rector,
  Lets your soul rot asleep to the grave,
You will find in your God the protector
  Of the freeman you fancied your slave."

She looked at the tuft of clover,
  And wept till her heart grew light;
And at last, when her passion was over,
  Went wandering into the night.

But the merry brown hares came leaping
  Over the uplands still,
Where the clover and corn lay sleeping
  On the side of the white chalk hill.

CHARLES KINGSLEY.


"THEY ARE DEAR FISH TO ME."


The farmer's wife sat at the door,
  A pleasant sight to see;
And blithesome were the wee, wee bairns
  That played around her knee.

When, bending 'neath her heavy creel,
  A poor fish-wife came by,
And, turning from the toilsome road,
  Unto the door drew nigh.

She laid her burden on the green,
  And spread its scaly store;
With trembling hands and pleading words,
  She told them o'er and o'er.

But lightly laughed the young guidwife,
  "We're no sae scarce o' cheer;
Tak' up your creel, and gang your ways,--
  I'll buy nae fish sae dear."

Bending beneath her load again,
  A weary sight to see;
Right sorely sighed the poor fish-wife,
  "They are dear fish to me!

"Our boat was oot ae fearfu' night,
  And when the storm blew o'er,
My husband, and my three brave sons,
  Lay corpses on the shore.

"I've been a wife for thirty years,
  A childless widow three;
I maun buy them now to sell again,--
  They are dear fish to me!"

The farmer's wife turned to the door,--
  What was't upon her cheek?
What was there rising in her breast,
  That then she scarce could speak?

She thought upon her ain guidman,
  Her lightsome laddies three;
The woman's words had pierced her heart,--
  "They are dear fish to me!"

"Come back," she cried, with quivering voice,
  And pity's gathering tear;
"Come in, come in, my poor woman,
  Ye 're kindly welcome here.

"I kentna o' your aching heart,
  Your weary lot to dree;
I'll ne'er forget your sad, sad words:
  'They are dear fish to me!'"

Ay, let the happy-hearted learn
  To pause ere they deny
The meed of honest toil, and think
  How much their gold may buy,--

How much of manhood's wasted strength,
  What woman's misery,--
What breaking hearts might swell the cry:
  "They are dear fish to me!"

ANONYMOUS.



GIVE ME THREE GRAINS OF CORN, MOTHER.

     THE IRISH FAMINE.


Give me three grains of corn, mother,--
  Only three grains of corn;
It will keep the little life I have
  Till the coming of the morn.
I am dying of hunger and cold, mother,--
  Dying of hunger and cold;
And half the agony of such a death
  My lips have never told.

It has gnawed like a wolf, at my heart, mother,--
  A wolf that is fierce for blood;
All the livelong day, and the night beside,
  Gnawing for lack of food.
I dreamed of bread in my sleep, mother,
  And the sight was heaven to see,
I awoke with an eager, famishing lip,
  But you had no bread for me.

How could I look to you, mother,--
  How could I look to you
For bread to give to your starving boy,
  When you were starving too?
For I read the famine in your cheek,
  And in your eyes so wild,
And I felt it in your bony hand,
  As you laid it on your child.

The Queen has lands and gold, mother,
  The Queen has lands and gold,
While you are forced to your empty breast
  A skeleton babe to hold,--
A babe that is dying of want, mother,
  As I am dying now,
With a ghastly look in its sunken eye,
  And famine upon its brow.

What has poor Ireland done, mother,--
  What has poor Ireland done,
That the world looks on, and sees us starve,
  Perishing one by one?
Do the men of England care not, mother,--
  The great men and the high,--
For the suffering sons of Erin's isle,
  Whether they live or die?

There is many a brave heart here, mother,
  Dying of want and cold,
While only across the Channel, mother,
  Are many that roll in gold;
There are rich and proud men there, mother,
  With wondrous wealth to view,
And the bread they fling to their dogs to-night
  Would give life to _me_ and _you_.

Come nearer to my side, mother.
  Come nearer to my side,
And hold me fondly, as you held
  My father when _he_ died;
Quick, for I cannot see you, mother,
  My breath is almost gone;
Mother! dear mother! ere I die,
  Give me three grains of corn.

AMELIA BLANDFORD EDWARDS.



THE SONG OF THE SHIRT.


With fingers weary and worn,
  With eyelids heavy and red,
A woman sat, in unwomanly rags,
  Plying her needle and thread,--
    Stitch! stitch! stitch!
In poverty, hunger, and dirt;
  And still with a voice of dolorous pitch
She sang the "Song of the Shirt!"

"Work! work! work
  While the cock is crowing aloof!
And work--work--work
  Till the stars shine through the roof!
It's, O, to be a slave
  Along with the barbarous Turk,
Where woman has never a soul to save,
  If this is Christian work!

"Work--work--work
  Till the brain begins to swim!
Work--work--work
  Till the eyes are heavy and dim!
Seam, and gusset, and band,
  Band, and gusset, and seam,--
Till over the buttons I fall asleep,
  And sew them on in a dream!

"O men with sisters dear!
  O men with mothers and wives!
It is no linen you're wearing out,
  But human creatures' lives!
    Stitch! stitch! stitch,
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,--
Sewing at once, with a double thread,
  A shroud as well as a shirt!

"But why do I talk of death,--
  That phantom of grisly bone?
I hardly fear his terrible shape,
  It seems so like my own,--
It seems so like my own
  Because of the fasts I keep;
O God! that bread should be so dear,
  And flesh and blood so cheap!

"Work--work--work
  My labor never flags;
And what are its wages? A bed of straw,
  A crust of bread--and rags,
That shattered roof--and this naked floor--
  A table--a broken chair--
And a wall so blank my shadow I thank
  For sometimes falling there!

"Work--work--work
  From weary chime to chime!
Work--work--work
  As prisoners work for crime!
Band, and gusset, and seam,
  Seam, and gusset, and band,
Till the heart is sick and the brain benumbed,
  As well as the weary hand.

"Work--work--work
  In the dull December light!
And work--work--work--
  When the weather is warm and bright!
While underneath the eaves
  The brooding swallows cling,
As if to show me their sunny backs,
  And twit me with the Spring.

"O, but to breathe the breath
  Of the cowslip and primrose sweet,--
With the sky above my head,
  And the grass beneath my feet!
For only one short hour
  To feel as I used to feel,
Before I knew the woes of want
  And the walk that costs a meal!

"O but for one short hour,--
  A respite, however brief!
No blessed leisure for love or hope,
  But only time for grief!
A little weeping would ease my heart;
  But in their briny bed
My tears must stop, for every drop
  Hinders needle and thread!"

With fingers weary and worn,
  With eyelids heavy and red,
A woman sat, in unwomanly rags,
  Plying her needle and thread,--
    Stitch! stitch! stitch,
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt;
And still with a voice of dolorous pitch--
Would that its tone could reach the rich!--
 She sang this "Song of the Shirt!"

THOMAS HOOD.



THE PAUPER'S DRIVE.


There's a grim one-horse hearse in a jolly round trot--
To the churchyard a pauper is going, I wot;
The road it is rough, and the hearse has no springs;
And hark to the dirge which the mad driver sings;
  _Rattle his bones over the stones!
  He's only a pauper whom nobody owns!_

O, where are the mourners? Alas! there are none,
He has left not a gap in the world, now he's gone,--
Not a tear in the eye of child, woman, or man;
To the grave with his carcass as fast as you can:
  _Rattle his bones over the stones!
  He's only a pauper whom nobody owns_!

What a jolting and creaking and splashing and din!
The whip, how it cracks! and the wheels, how they spin!
How the dirt, right and left, o'er the hedges is hurled!
The pauper at length makes a noise in the world!
  _Rattle his bones over the stones!
  He's only a pauper whom nobody owns!_

Poor pauper defunct! he has made some approach
To gentility, now that he's stretched in a coach!
He's taking a drive in his carriage at last!
But it will not be long, if he goes on so fast:
  _Rattle his bones over the stones!
  He's only a pauper whom nobody owns!_

You bumpkins! who stare at your brother conveyed,
Behold what respect to a cloddy is paid!
And be joyful to think, when by death you 're laid low,
You've a chance to the grave like a gemman to go!
  _Rattle his bones over the stones!
  He's only a pauper whom nobody owns!_

But a truce to this strain; for my soul it is sad,
To think that a heart in humanity clad
Should make, like the brute, such a desolate end,
And depart from the light without leaving a friend!
  _Bear soft his bones over the stones!
  Though a pauper, he's one whom his Maker yet owns!_

THOMAS NOEL.



UNSEEN SPIRITS.


The shadows lay along Broadway,
  'T was near the twilight-tide,
And slowly there a lady fair
  Was walking in her pride.
Alone walked she; but, viewlessly,
  Walked spirits at her side.

Peace charmed the street beneath her feet,
  And Honor charmed the air;
And all astir looked kind on her,
  And called her good as fair,--
For all God ever gave to her
  She kept with chary care.

She kept with care her beauties rare
  From lovers warm and true,
For her heart was cold to all but gold,
  And the rich came not to woo,--
But honored well are charms to sell
  If priests the selling do.

Now walking there was one more fair,--
  A slight girl, lily-pale;
And she had unseen company
  To make the spirit quail,--
'Twixt Want and Scorn she walked forlorn,
  And nothing could avail.

No mercy now can clear her brow
  For this world's peace to pray;
For, as love's wild prayer dissolved in air,
  Her woman's heart gave way!--
But the sin forgiven by Christ in heaven
  By man is cursed alway!


NATHANIEL PARKER WILLIS.



BEAUTIFUL SNOW.


O the snow, the beautiful snow,
Filling the sky and the earth below!
Over the house-tops, over the street,
Over the heads of the people you meet,
  Dancing,
    Flirting,
      Skimming along.
Beautiful snow! it can do nothing wrong.
Flying to kiss a fair lady's cheek;
Clinging to lips in a frolicsome freak;
Beautiful snow, from the heavens above,
Pure as an angel and fickle as love!

O the snow, the beautiful snow!
How the flakes gather and laugh as they go!
Whirling about in its maddening fun,
It plays in its glee with every one.
  Chasing,
    Laughing,
      Hurrying by,
It lights up the face and it sparkles the eye;
And even the dogs, with a bark and a bound,
Snap at the crystals that eddy around.
The town is alive, and its heart in a glow,
To welcome the coming of beautiful snow.
How the wild crowd go swaying along,
Hailing each other with humor and song!
How the gay sledges like meteors flash by,--
Bright for the moment, then lost to the eye!
  Ringing,
    Swinging,
      Dashing they go
Over the crest of the beautiful snow:
Snow so pure when it falls from the sky,
To be trampled in mud by the crowd rushing by;
To be trampled and tracked by the thousands of feet
Till it blends with the horrible filth in the street.


Once I was pure as the snows,--but I fell:
Fell, like the snow-flakes, from heaven--to hell:
Fell, to be tramped as the filth of the street:
Fell, to be scoffed, to be spit on, and beat.
  Pleading,
    Cursing,
      Dreading to die,
Selling my soul to whoever would buy,
Dealing in shame for a morsel of bread,
Hating the living and fearing the dead.
Merciful God! have I fallen so low?
And yet I was once like this beautiful snow!

Once I was fair as the beautiful snow,
With an eye like its crystals, a heart like its glow;
Once I was loved for my innocent grace,--
Flattered and sought for the charm of my face.
  Father,
    Mother,
      Sisters all,
God, and myself, I have lost by my fall.
The veriest wretch that goes shivering by
Will take a wide sweep, lest I wander too nigh;
For all that is on or about me, I know
There is nothing that's pure but the beautiful snow.

How strange it should be that this beautiful snow
Should fall on a sinner with nowhere to go!
How strange it would be, when the night comes again,
If the snow and the ice struck my desperate brain!
  Fainting,
    Freezing,
      Dying alone,
Too wicked for prayer, too weak for my moan
To be heard in the crash of the crazy town,
Gone mad in its joy at the snow's coming down;
To lie and to die in my terrible woe,
With a bed and a shroud of the beautiful snow!

JAMES W. WATSON.



LONDON CHURCHES.


I stood, one Sunday morning,
Before a large church door,
The congregation gathered,
And carriages a score,--
From one out stepped a lady
I oft had seen before.

Her hand was on a prayer-book,
And held a vinaigrette;
The sign of man's redemption
Clear on the book was set,--
But above the cross there glistened
A golden Coronet.

For her the obsequious beadle
The inner door flung wide;
Lightly, as up a ball-room,
Her footsteps seemed to glide,--
There might be good thoughts in her,
For all her evil pride.

But after her a woman
Peeped wistfully within,
On whose wan face was graven
Life's hardest discipline,--
The trace of the sad trinity
Of weakness, pain, and sin.

The few free-seats were crowded
Where she could rest and pray;
With her worn garb contrasted
Each side in fair array,--
"God's house holds no poor sinners,"
She sighed, and crept away.

RICHARD MONCKTON MILNES (LORD HOUGHTON.)



THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS.

     "Drowned! drowned!"--HAMLET.


One more unfortunate,
Weary of breath,
Rashly importunate,
Gone to her death!

Take her up tenderly,
Lift her with care!
Fashioned so slenderly,
Young, and so fair!

Look at her garments
Clinging like cerements,
Whilst the wave constantly
Drips from her clothing;
Take her up instantly,
Loving, not loathing!

Touch her not scornfully!
Think of her mournfully,
Gently and humanly,--
Not of the stains of her;
All that remains of her
Now is pure womanly.

Make no deep scrutiny
Into her mutiny,
Rash and undutiful;
Past all dishonor,
Death has left on her
Only the beautiful.

Still, for all slips of hers,--
One of Eve's family,--
Wipe those poor lips of hers,
Oozing so clammily.
Loop up her tresses
Escaped from the comb,--
Her fair auburn tresses,--
Whilst wonderment guesses
Where was her home?

Who was her father?
Who was her mother?
Had she a sister?
Had she a brother?
Or was there a dearer one
Still, and a nearer one
Yet, than all other?

Alas! for the rarity
Of Christian charity
Under the sun!
O, it was pitiful!
Near a whole city full,
Home she had none.

Sisterly, brotherly,
Fatherly, motherly
Feelings had changed,--
Love, by harsh evidence,
Thrown from its eminence;
Even God's providence
Seeming estranged.

Where the lamps quiver
So far in the river,
With many a light
From window and casement,
From garret to basement,
She stood, with amazement,
Houseless by night.

The bleak wind of March
Made her tremble and shiver;
But not the dark arch,
Or the black floating river;
Mad from life's history,
Glad to death's mystery,
Swift to be hurled--
Anywhere, anywhere
Out of the world!

In she plunged boldly,--
No matter how coldly
The rough river ran--
Over the brink of it!
Picture it--think of it,
Dissolute man!
Lave in it, drink of it,
Then, if you can!

Take her up tenderly,
Lift her with care!
Fashioned so slenderly,
Young, and so fair!

Ere her limbs, frigidly,
Stiffen too rigidly,
Decently, kindly!
Smooth and compose them;
And her eyes, close them,
Staring so blindly!
Dreadfully staring
Through muddy impurity,
As when with the daring
Last look of despairing
Fixed on futurity.

Perishing gloomily,
Spurred by contumely,
Cold inhumanity,
Burning insanity,
Into her rest!
Cross her hands humbly,
As if praying dumbly,
Over her breast!

Owning her weakness,
Her evil behavior,
And leaving, with meekness,
Her sins to her Saviour!

THOMAS HOOD.



GUILTY, OR NOT GUILTY?


She stood at the bar of justice,
  A creature wan and wild,
In form too small for a woman,
  In feature too old for a child.
For a look so worn and pathetic
  Was stamped on her pale young face,
It seemed long years of suffering
  Must have left that silent trace.

"Your name," said the judge, as he eyed her
  With kindly look, yet keen,
"Is--?" "Mary McGuire, if you please, sir."
  "And your age?" "I am turned fifteen."
"Well, Mary--" And then from a paper
  He slowly and gravely read,
"You are charged here--I am sorry to say it--
  With stealing three loaves of bread.

"You look not like an offender,
  And I hope that you can show
The charge to be false. Now, tell me,
  Are you guilty of this, or no?"
A passionate burst of weeping
  Was at first her sole reply;
But she dried her tears in a moment,
  And looked in the judge's eye.

"I will tell you just how it was, sir;
  My father and mother are dead,
And my little brothers and sisters
  Were hungry, and asked me for bread.
At first I earned it for them
  By working hard all day,
But somehow the times were hard, sir,
  And the work all fell away.

"I could get no more employment;
  The weather was bitter cold;
The young ones cried and shivered
  (Little Johnnie's but four years old).
So what was I to do, sir?
  I am guilty, but do not condemn;
I _took_--oh, was it _stealing_?--
  The bread to give to them."

Every man in the court-room--
  Graybeard and thoughtless youth--
Knew, as he looked upon her,
  That the prisoner spake the truth.
Out from their pockets came kerchiefs,
  Out from their eyes sprang tears,
And out from the old faded wallets
  Treasures hoarded for years.

The judge's face was a study,
  The strangest you ever saw,
As he cleared his throat and murmured
  _Something_ about the _law_.
For one so learned in such matters,
  So wise in dealing with men,
He seemed on a simple question
  Sorely puzzled just then.

But no one blamed him, or wondered,
  When at last these words they heard,
"The sentence of this young prisoner
  Is for the present deferred."
And no one blamed him, or wondered,
  When he went to her and smiled,
And tenderly led from the court-room,
  Himself, the "guilty" child.

ANONYMOUS.



THE FEMALE CONVICT.


She shrank from all, and her silent mood
Made her wish only for solitude:
Her eye sought the ground, as it could not brook,
For innermost shame, on another's to look;
And the cheerings of comfort fell on her ear
Like deadliest words, that were curses to hear!--
She still was young, and she had been fair;
But weather-stains, hunger, toil, and care,
That frost and fever that wear the heart,
Had made the colors of youth depart
From the sallow cheek, save over it came
The burning flush of the spirit's shame.

They were sailing over the salt sea-foam,
Far from her country, far from her home;
And all she had left for her friends to keep
Was a name to hide and a memory to weep!
And her future held forth but the felon's lot,--
To live forsaken, to die forgot!
She could not weep, and she could not pray,
But she wasted and withered from day to day,
Till you might have counted each sunken vein,
When her wrist was prest by the iron chain;
And sometimes I thought her large dark eye
Had the glisten of red insanity.

She called me once to her sleeping-place,
A strange, wild look was upon her face,
Her eye flashed over her cheek so white,
Like a gravestone seen in the pale moonlight,
And she spoke in a low, unearthly tone,--
The sound from mine ear hath never gone!--
"I had last night the loveliest dream:
My own land shone in the summer beam,
I saw the fields of the golden grain,
I heard the reaper's harvest strain;
There stood on the hills the green pine-tree,
And the thrush and the lark sang merrily.
A long and a weary way I had come;
But I stopped, methought, by mine own sweet home.
I stood by the hearth, and my father sat there,
With pale, thin face, and snow-white hair!
The Bible lay open upon his knee,
But he closed the book to welcome me.
He led me next where my mother lay,
And together we knelt by her grave to pray,
And heard a hymn it was heaven to hear,
For it echoed one to my young days dear.
This dream has waked feelings long, long since fled,
And hopes which I deemed in my heart were dead!
--We have not spoken, but still I have hung
On the Northern accents that dwell on thy tongue.
To me they are music, to me they recall
The things long hidden by Memory's pall!
Take this long curl of yellow hair,
And give it my father, and tell him my prayer,
My dying prayer, was for him." ...

                              Next day
Upon the deck a coffin lay;
They raised it up, and like a dirge
The heavy gale swept over the surge;
The corpse was cast to the wind and wave,--
The convict has found in the green sea a grave.

LETITIA ELIZABETH LANDON.



HOPELESS GRIEF.


I tell you, hopeless grief is passionless,--
That only men incredulous of despair,
Half-taught in anguish, through the midnight air
Beat upwards to God's throne in loud access
Of shrieking and reproach. Full desertness,
In souls as countries lieth silent-bare
Under the blanching, vertical eye-glare
Of the absolute heavens. Deep-hearted man, express
Grief for thy Dead in silence like to death;
Most like a monumental statue set
In everlasting watch and moveless woe,
Till itself crumble to the dust beneath.
Touch it: the marble eyelids are not wet--
If it could weep, it could arise and go.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.

       *       *       *       *       *




IV. COMFORT AND CHEER.



TO MYSELF.


Let nothing make thee sad or fretful,
       Or too regretful;
             Be still;
What God hath ordered must be right;
Then find in it thine own delight,
             My will.

Why shouldst thou fill to-day with sorrow
       About to-morrow.
             My heart?
_One_ watches all with care most true;
Doubt not that he will give thee too
             Thy part.

Only be steadfast; never waver,
       Nor seek earth's favor,
             But rest:
Thou knowest what God wills must be
For all his creatures, so for thee,
             The best.

From the German of PAUL FLEMING.
Translation of CATHERINE WINKWORTH.



THE FLOWER.


  How fresh, O Lord, how sweet and clean
Are thy returns! even as the flowers in spring;
  To which, besides their own demean,
The late-past frosts tributes of pleasure bring.
      Grief melts away
      Like snow in May,
  As if there were no such cold thing.

  Who would have thought my shrivelled heart
Could have recovered greenness? It was gone
  Quite underground; as flowers depart
To see their mother root, when they have blown;
      Where they together
      All the hard weather,
  Dead to the world, keep house unknown.

  These are thy wonders, Lord of power,
Killing and quickning, bringing down to hell
  And up to heaven in an houre;
Making a chiming of a passing-bell.
      We say amisse
      This or that is:
  Thy word is all, if we could spell.

  O that I once past changing were,
Fast in thy paradise, where no flower can wither!
  Many a spring I shoot up fair,
Off'ring at heav'n, growing and groning thither;
      Nor doth my flower
      Want a spring-showre,
  My sinnes and I joining together.

  But, while I grow in a straight line,
Still upwards bent, as if heav'n were mine own,
  Thy anger comes, and I decline:
What frost to that? what pole is not the zone
      Where all things burn,
      When thou dost turn,
  And the least frown of thine is shown?

  And now in age I bud again;
After so many deaths I live and write;
  I once more smell the dew and rain,
And relish versing: O my only light,
      It cannot be
      That I am he
  On whom thy tempests fell all night!

  These are thy wonders, Lord of love,
To make us see we are but flowers that glide;
  Which when we once can finde and prove,
Thou hast a garden for us where to bide.
      Who would be more,
      Swelling through store,
  Forfeit their paradise by their pride.

GEORGE HERBERT.



SONNET.

     TO CYRIACK SKINNER.


Cyriack, this three years' day, these eyes, though clear,
  To outward view, of blemish or of spot,
  Bereft of light, their seeing have forgot:
Nor to their idle orbs doth sight appear
Of sun, or moon, or stars, throughout the year,
  Or man or woman, yet I argue not
  Against Heaven's hand or will, nor bate a jot
Of heart or hope; but still bear up and steer
Right onward. What supports me, dost thou ask?
The conscience, friend, to have lost them overplied
In Liberty's defence, my noble task,
Of which all Europe rings from side to side.
This thought might lead me through the world's vain mask,
Content, though blind, had I no better guide.

MILTON.



INVICTUS.


Out of the night that covers me,
  Black as the pit from pole to pole,
I thank whatever gods may be
  For my unconquerable soul.

In the fell clutch of circumstance
  I have not winced nor cried aloud;
Under the bludgeonings of chance
  My head is bloody, but unbowed.

Beyond this place of wrath and tears
  Looms but the Horror of the shade,

And yet the menace of the years
  Finds and shall find me unafraid.

It matters not how strait the gate,
  How charged with punishments the scroll,
I am the master of my fate;
  I am the captain of my soul.

WILLIAM ERNEST HENLEY.



AFAR IN THE DESERT.

Afar in the desert I love to ride,
With the silent Bush-boy alone by my side:
When the sorrows of life the soul o'ercast,
And, sick of the present, I cling to the past;
When the eye is suffused with regretful tears,
From the fond recollections of former years;
And shadows of things that have long since fled
Flit over the brain, like the ghosts of the dead,--
Bright visions of glory that vanished too soon;
Day-dreams, that departed ere manhood's noon;
Attachments by fate or falsehood reft;
Companions of early days lost or left;
And my native land, whose magical name
Thrills to the heart like electric flame;
The home of my childhood; the haunts of my prime;
All the passions and scenes of that rapturous time
When the feelings were young, and the world was new,
Like the fresh bowers of Eden unfolding to view;
All, all now forsaken, forgotten, foregone!
And I, a lone exile remembered of none,
My high aims abandoned, my good acts undone,
Aweary of all that is under the sun,
With that sadness of heart which no stranger may scan,
I fly to the desert afar from man.

Afar in the desert I love to ride,
With the silent Bush-boy alone by my side!
When the wild turmoil of this wearisome life,
With its scenes of oppression, corruption, and strife,
The proud man's frown, and the base man's fear,
The scorner's laugh, and the sufferer's tear,
And malice, and meanness, and falsehood, and folly,
Dispose me to musing and dark melancholy;
When my bosom is full, and my thoughts are high,
And my soul is sick with the bondman's sigh,--
O, then there is freedom, and joy, and pride,
Afar in the desert alone to ride!
There is rapture to vault on the champing steed,
And to bound away with the eagle's speed,
With the death-fraught firelock in my hand,--
The only law of the Desert Land!

Afar in the desert I love to ride,
With the silent Bush-boy alone by my side,
Away, away from the dwellings of men,
By the wild deer's haunt, by the buffalo's glen;
By valleys remote where the oribi plays,
Where the gnu, the gazelle, and the hartebeest graze,
And the kudu and eland unhunted recline
By the skirts of gray forest o'erhung with wild vine;
Where the elephant browses at peace in his wood,
And the river-horse gambols unscared in the flood,
And the mighty rhinoceros wallows at will
In the fen where the wild ass is drinking his fill.

Afar in the desert I love to ride,
With the silent Bush-boy alone by my side,
O'er the brown karroo, where the bleating cry
Of the springbok's fawn sounds plaintively;
And the timorous quagga's shrill whistling neigh
Is heard by the fountain at twilight gray;
Where the zebra wantonly tosses his mane.
With wild hoof scouring the desolate plain;
And the fleet-footed ostrich over the waste
Speeds like a horseman who travels in haste,
Hieing away to the home of her rest,
Where she and her mate have scooped their nest,
Far hid from the pitiless plunderer's view
In the pathless depths of the parched karroo.

Afar in the desert I love to ride.
With the silent Bush-boy alone by my side,
Away, away, in the wilderness vast
Where the white man's foot hath never passed,
And the quivered Coranna or Bechuan
Hath rarely crossed with his roving clan,--
A region of emptiness, howling and drear,
Which man hath abandoned from famine and fear;
Which the snake and the lizard inhabit alone,
With the twilight bat from the yawning stone;
Where grass, nor herb, nor shrub takes root,
Save poisonous thorns that pierce the foot;
And the bitter-melon, for food and drink,
Is the pilgrim's fare by the salt lake's brink;
A region of drought, where no river glides,
Nor rippling brook with osiered sides;
Where sedgy pool, nor bubbling fount,
Nor tree, nor cloud, nor misty mount,
Appears, to refresh the aching eye;
But the barren earth and the burning sky,
And the blank horizon, round and round,
Spread,--void of living sight or sound.
And here, while the night-winds round me sigh,
And the stars burn bright in the midnight sky,
As I sit apart by the desert stone,
Like Elijah at Horeb's cave, alone,
"A still small voice" comes through the wild
(Like a father consoling his fretful child),
Which banishes bitterness, wrath, and fear,
Saying,--Man is distant, but God is near!

THOMAS PRINGLE.



SAD IS OUR YOUTH, FOR IT IS EVER GOING.


Sad is our youth, for it is ever going,
Crumbling away beneath our very feet;
Sad is our life, for onward it is flowing
In current unperceived, because so fleet;
Sad are our hopes, for they were sweet in sowing,--
But tares, self-sown, have overtopped the wheat;
Sad are our joys, for they were sweet in blowing,
And still, O, still their dying breath is sweet;
And sweet is youth, although it hath bereft us
Of that which made our childhood sweeter still;
And sweet is middle life, for it hath left us
A nearer good to cure an older ill;
And sweet are all things, when we learn to prize them,
Not for their sake, but His who grants them or denies them!

AUBREY THOMAS DE VERE.



MY WIFE AND CHILD.[5]


The tattoo beats,--the lights are gone,
  The camp around in slumber lies,
The night with solemn pace moves on,
  The shadows thicken o'er the skies;
But sleep my weary eyes hath flown,
  And sad, uneasy thoughts arise.

I think of thee, O darling one,
  Whose love my early life hath blest--
Of thee and him--our baby son--
  Who slumbers on thy gentle breast.
God of the tender, frail, and lone,
  O, guard the tender sleeper's rest!

And hover gently, hover near
  To her whose watchful eye is wet,--

To mother, wife,--the doubly dear,
  In whose young heart have freshly met
Two streams of love so deep and clear,
  And cheer her drooping spirits yet.

Now, while she kneels before thy throne,
  O, teach her, Ruler of the skies,
That, while by thy behest alone
  Earth's mightiest powers fall and rise,
No tear is wept to thee unknown,
  No hair is lost, no sparrow dies!

That thou canst stay the ruthless hands
  Of dark disease, and soothe its pain;
That only by thy stern commands
  The battle's lost, the soldier's slain;
That from the distant sea or land
  Thou bring'st the wanderer home again.

And when upon her pillow lone
  Her tear-wet cheek is sadly pressed,
May happier visions beam upon
  The brightened current of her breast,
No frowning look or angry tone
  Disturb the Sabbath of her rest!

Whatever fate these forms may show,
  Loved with a passion almost wild,
By day, by night, in joy or woe,
  By fears oppressed, or hopes beguiled,
From every danger, every foe,
  O God, protect my wife and child!

HENRY R. JACKSON.

  [5] Written in the year 1846, in Mexico, the writer being at that time
Colonel of the 1st regiment of Georgia Volunteers.



THE RAINY DAY.


The day is cold, and dark, and dreary;
It rains, and the wind is never weary;
The vine still clings to the moldering wall,
But at every gust the dead leaves fall,
  And the day is dark and dreary.

My life is cold, and dark, and dreary;
It rains, and the wind is never weary;
My thoughts still cling to the moldering Past,
But the hopes of youth fall thick in the blast,
  And the days are dark and dreary.

Be still, sad heart! and cease repining;
Behind the clouds is the sun still shining;
Thy fate is the common fate of all,
Into each life some rain must fall,
  Some days must be dark and dreary.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



TIMES GO BY TURNS.


The lopped tree in time may grow again;
Most naked plants renew both fruit and flower;
The sorest wight may find release of pain,
The driest soil suck in some moist'ning shower;
Times go by turns and chances change by course,
From foul to fair, from better hap to worse.
The sea of Fortune doth not ever flow,
She draws her favors to the lowest ebb;
Her time hath equal times to come and go,
Her loom doth weave the fine and coarsest web;
No joy so great but runneth to an end,
No hap so hard but may in fine amend.

Not always fall of leaf nor ever spring,
No endless night yet not eternal day;
The saddest birds a season find to sing,
The roughest storm a calm may soon allay;
Thus with succeeding turns God tempereth all,
That man may hope to rise yet fear to fall.

A chance may win that by mischance was lost;
The well that holds no great, takes little fish;
In some things all, in all things none are crossed,
Few all they need, but none have all they wish;
Unmeddled joys here to no man befall,
Who least hath some, who most hath never all.

ROBERT SOUTHWELL.



COMPENSATION.


Tears wash away the atoms in the eye
  That smarted for a day;
Rain-clouds that spoiled the splendors of the sky
  The fields with flowers array.

No chamber of pain but has some hidden door
  That promises release;
No solitude so drear but yields its store
  Of thought and inward peace.

No night so wild but brings the constant sun
  With love and power untold;
No time so dark but through its woof there run
  Some blessed threads of gold.

And through the long and storm-tost centuries burn
  In changing calm and strife
The Pharos-lights of truth, where'er we turn,--
  The unquenched lamps of life.

O Love supreme! O Providence divine!
  What self-adjusting springs
Of law and life, what even scales, are thine,
  What sure-returning wings

Of hopes and joys, that flit like birds away,
  When chilling autumn blows,
But come again, long ere the buds of May
  Their rosy lips unclose!

What wondrous play of mood and accident
  Through shifting days and years;
What fresh returns of vigor overspent
  In feverish dreams and fears!

What wholesome air of conscience and of thought
  When doubts and forms oppress;
What vistas opening to the gates we sought
  Beyond the wilderness;

Beyond the narrow cells, where self-involved,
  Like chrysalids, we wait
The unknown births, the mysteries unsolved
  Of death and change and fate!

O Light divine! we need no fuller test
  That all is ordered well;
We know enough to trust that all is best
  Where love and wisdom dwell.

CHRISTOPHER PEARSE CRANCH.



THE CHANGED CROSS.


It was a time of sadness, and my heart,
Although it knew and loved the better part,
Felt wearied with the conflict and the strife,
And all the needful discipline of life.

And while I thought on these, as given to me,
My trial-tests of faith and love to be,
It seemed as if I never could be sure
That faithful to the end I should endure.

And thus, no longer trusting to his might
Who says, "We walk by faith and not by sight,"
Doubting, and almost yielding to despair,
The thought arose, "My cross I cannot bear.

"Far heavier its weight must surely be
Than those of others which I daily see;
Oh! if I might another burden choose,
Methinks I should not fear my crown to lose."

A solemn silence reigned on all around,
E'en Nature's voices uttered not a sound;
The evening shadows seemed of peace to tell,
And sleep upon my weary spirit fell.

A moment's pause,--and then a heavenly light
Beamed full upon my wondering, raptured sight;
Angels on silvery wings seemed everywhere,
And angels' music thrilled the balmy air.

Then One, more fair than all the rest to see,
One to whom all the others bowed the knee,
Came gently to me, as I trembling lay,
And, "Follow me," he said; "I am the Way."

Then, speaking thus, he led me far above,
And there, beneath a canopy of love,
Grosses of divers shape and size were seen,
Larger and smaller than my own had been.

And one there was, most beauteous to behold,--
A little one, with jewels set in gold.
"Ah! this," methought, "I can with comfort wear,
For it will be an easy one to bear."

And so the little cross I quickly took,
But all at once my frame beneath it shook;
The sparkling jewels, fair were they to _see_,
But far too heavy was their _weight_ for me.

"This may not be," I cried, and looked again,
To see if there was any here could ease my pain;
But, one by one, I passed them slowly by,
Till on a lovely one I cast my eye.

Fair flowers around its sculptured form entwined,
And grace and beauty seemed in it combined.
Wondering, I gazed,--and still I wondered more,
To think so many should have passed it o'er.

But oh! that form so beautiful to see
Soon made its hidden sorrows known to me;
Thorns lay beneath those flowers and colors fair;
Sorrowing, I said, "This cross I may not bear."

And so it was with each and all around,--
Not one to suit my _need_ could there be found;
Weeping, I laid each heavy burden down,
As my Guide gently said, "No cross,--no crown."

At length to him I raised my saddened heart;
He knew its sorrows, bade its doubts depart;
"Be not afraid," he said, "but trust in me;
My perfect love shall now be shown to thee."

And then, with lightened eyes and willing feet,
Again I turned my earthly cross to meet;
With forward footsteps, turning not aside,
For fear some hidden evil might betide;

And there--in the prepared, appointed way,
Listening to hear, and ready to obey--
A cross I quickly found of plainest form,
With only words of love inscribed thereon.

With thankfulness I raised it from the rest,
And joyfully acknowledged it the best,
The only one, of all the many there.
That I could feel was good for me to bear.

And, while I thus my chosen one confessed,
I saw a heavenly brightness on it rest;
And as I bent, my burden to sustain,
I recognized _my own old cross_ again.

But oh! how different did it seem to be,
Now I had learned its preciousness to see!
No longer could I unbelieving say
"Perhaps another is a better way."

Ah, no! henceforth my one desire shall be,
That he who knows me best should choose for me;
And so, whate'er his love sees good to send,
I'll trust it's best,--because he knows the end.

HON. MRS. CHARLES HOBART.



SOMETHING BEYOND.


Something beyond! though now, with joy unfound,
  The life-task falleth from thy weary hand,
Be brave, be patient! In the fair beyond
      Thou'lt understand.

Thou'lt understand why our most royal hours
  Couch sorrowful slaves bound by low nature's greed;
Why the celestial soul's a minion made
      To narrowest need.

In this pent sphere of being incomplete,
  The imperfect fragment of a beauteous whole,
For yon rare regions, where the perfect meet,
      Sighs the lone soul.

Sighs for the perfect! Far and fair it lies;
  It hath no half-fed friendships perishing fleet,
No partial insights, no averted eyes,
      No loves unmeet.

Something beyond! Light for our clouded eyes!
  In this dark dwelling, in its shrouded beams,
Our best waits masked, few pierce the soul's disguise;
      How sad it seems!

Something beyond! Ah, if it were not so,
  Darker would be thy face, O brief To-day;
Earthward we 'd bow beneath life's smiting woe,
      Powerless to pray.

Something beyond! The immortal morning stands
  Above the night; clear shines her precious brow;
The pendulous star in her transfigured hands
      Brightens the Now.

MARY CLEMMER AMES HUDSON.



DESPONDENCY REBUKED.


Say not, the struggle nought availeth,
  The labor and the wounds are vain,
The enemy faints not, nor faileth,
  And as things have been they remain.

If hopes were dupes, fears may be liars;
  It may be, in you smoke concealed,
Your comrades chase e'en now the fliers,
  And, but for you, possess the field.

For while the tired waves, vainly breaking,
  Seem here no painful inch to gain,
Far back, through creeks and inlets making,
  Comes silent, flooding in, the main.

And not by eastern windows only.
  When daylight comes, comes in the light;
In front, the sun climbs slow, how slowly,
  But westward, look, the land is bright.

ARTHUR HUGH CLOUGH.



GOD'S SURE HELP IN SORROW.


      Leave all to God,
Forsaken one, and stay thy tears;
  For the Highest knows thy pain,
Sees thy sufferings and thy fears;
  Thou shalt not wait his help in vain;
      Leave all to God!

      Be still and trust!
For his strokes are strokes of love,
  Thou must for thy profit bear;
He thy filial fear would move,
  Trust thy Father's loving care,
      Be still and trust!

      Know, God is near!
Though thou think him far away,
  Though his mercy long have slept,
He will come and not delay,
  When his child enough hath wept,
      For God is near!

      Oh, teach him not
When and how to hear thy prayers;
  Never doth our God forget;
He the cross who longest bears
  Finds his sorrows' bounds are set;
      Then teach him not!

      If thou love him,
Walking truly in his ways,
  Then no trouble, cross, or death
E'er shall silence faith and praise;
  All things serve thee here beneath,
      If thou love God.

From the German of ANTON ULEICH, DUKE OF BRUNSWICK, 1667.
Translation of CATHERINE WINKWORTH, 1855.



SONNET.


While yet these tears have power to flow
  For hours for ever past away;
While yet these swelling sighs allow
  My faltering voice to breathe a lay;
While yet my hand can touch the chords,
  My tender lute, to wake thy tone;
While yet my mind no thought affords,
  But one remembered dream alone,
I ask not death, whate'er my state:
  But when my eyes can weep no more,
    My voice is lost, my hand untrue.
  And when my spirit's fire is o'er,
    Nor can express the love it knew,
Come, Death, and cast thy shadows o'er my fate!

From the French of LOUISE LABE.
Translation of LOUISE STUART COSTELLO.



WAITING.


Serene, I fold my hands and wait,
  Nor care for wind, or tide, or sea;
I rave no more 'gainst time or fate,
  For, lo! my own shall come to me.

I stay my haste, I make delays,
  For what avails this eager pace?
I stand amid the eternal ways,
  And what is mine shall know my face.

Asleep, awake, by night or day.
  The friends I seek are seeking me;
No wind can drive my bark astray,
  Nor change the tide of destiny.

What matter if I stand alone?
  I wait with joy the coming years;
My heart shall reap where it has sown,
  And garner up its fruit of tears.

The waters know their own and draw
  The brook that springs in yonder height;

So flows the good with equal law
  Unto the soul of pure delight.

The stars come nightly to the sky;
  The tidal wave unto the sea;
Nor time, nor space, nor deep, nor high,
  Can keep my own away from me.

JOHN BURROUGHS.



AUNT PHILLIS'S GUEST.

     ST. HELENA ISLAND, SOUTH CAROLINA, IN 1863.


I was young and "Harry" was strong,
The summer was bursting from sky and plain,
Thrilling our blood as we bounded along,--
When a picture flashed, and I dropped the rein.

A black sea-creek, with snaky run
Slipping through low green leagues of sedge,
An ebbing tide, and a setting sun;
A hut and a woman by the edge.

Her back was bent and her wool was gray;
The wrinkles lay close on the withered face;
Children were buried and sold away,--
The Freedom had come to the last of a race!

She lived from a neighbor's hominy-pot;
And praised the Lord, if "the pain" passed by;
From the earthen floor the smoke curled out
Through shingles patched with the bright blue sky.

"Aunt Phillis, you live here all alone?"
I asked, and pitied the gray old head;
Sure as a child, in quiet tone,
"Me and Jesus, Massa," she said.

I started, for all the place was aglow
With a presence I had not seen before;
The air was full of a music low,
And the Guest Divine stood at the door!

Ay, it was true that the Lord of Life,
Who seeth the widow give her mite,
Had watched this slave in her weary strife,
And shown himself to her longing sight.

The hut and the dirt, the rags and the skin,
The grovelling want and the darkened mind,--
I looked on this; but the Lord, within:
I would what he saw was in me to find!

A childlike soul, whose faith had force
To see what the angels see in bliss:
She lived, and the Lord lived; so, of course,
They lived together,--she knew but this.

And the life that I had almost despised
As something to pity, so poor and low,
Had already borne fruit that the Lord so prized
He loved to come near and see it grow.

No sorrow for her that life was done:
A few more days of the hut's unrest,
A little while longer to sit in the sun,--
Then--He would be host, and she would be guest!

And up above, if an angel of light
Should stop on his errand of love some day
To ask, "Who lives in the mansion bright?"
"Me and Jesus," Aunt Phillis will say.

       *       *       *       *       *

A fancy, foolish and fond, does it seem?
And things are not as Aunt Phillises dream?

        Friend, surely so!
        For this I know,--
That our faiths are foolish by falling below,
Not coming above, what God will show;
That his commonest thing hides a wonder vast,
To whose beauty our eyes have never passed;
That his face in the present, or in the to-be,
Outshines the best that we think we see.

WILLIAM CHANNING GANNETT.



ILKA BLADE O' GRASS KEPS ITS AIN DRAP O' DEW.


Confide ye aye in Providence, for Providence is kind,
And bear ye a' life's changes, wi' a calm and tranquil mind,
Though pressed and hemmed on every side, ha'e faith and ye 'll win through,
For ilka blade o' grass keps its ain drap o' dew.

Gin reft frae friends or crest in love, as whiles nae doubt ye've been,
Grief lies deep hidden in your heart or tears flow frae your een,
Believe it for the best, and trow there's good in store for you,
For ilka blade o' grass keps its ain drap o' dew.

In lang, lang days o' simmer, when the clear and cloudless sky
Refuses ae wee drap o' rain to nature parched and dry,
The genial night, wi' balmy breath, gars verdure spring anew,
And ilka blade o' grass keps its ain drap o' dew.

Sae, lest 'mid fortune's sunshine we should feel owre proud and hie,
And in our pride forget to wipe the tear frae poortith's ee,
Some wee dark clouds o' sorrow come, we ken na whence or hoo,
But ilka blade o' grass keps its ain drap o' dew.

JAMES BALLANTINE.



UNCHANGING.


In early days methought that all must last;
  Then I beheld all changing, dying, fleeting;
But though my soul now grieves for much that's past,
And changeful fortunes set my heart oft beating,
I yet believe in mind that all will last,
Because the old in new I still am meeting.

From the German of
FRIEDRICH MARTIN VON BODENSTEDT.



I HOLD STILL.


Pain's furnace heat within me quivers,
  God's breath upon the flame doth blow,
And all my heart in anguish shivers,
  And trembles at the fiery glow:
And yet I whisper, As God will!
And in his hottest fire hold still.

He comes and lays my heart, all heated,
  On the hard anvil, minded so
Into his own fair shape to beat it
  With his great hammer, blow on blow:
And yet I whisper, As God will!
And at his heaviest blows hold still.

He takes my softened heart and beats it,--
  The sparks fly off at every blow;
He turns it o'er and o'er, and heats it,
  And lets it cool, and makes it glow:
And yet I whisper, As God will!
And, in his mighty hand, hold still.

Why should I murmur? for the sorrow
  Thus only longer-lived would be;
Its end may come, and will, to-morrow,
  When God has done his work in me;
So I say, trusting, As God will!
And, trusting to the end, hold still.

He kindles for my profit purely
  Affliction's glowing fiery brand,
And all his heaviest blows are surely
  Inflicted by a Master-hand:
So I say, praying, As God will!
And hope in him, and suffer still.

From the German of JULIUS STURM.



THE GOOD GREAT MAN.


How seldom, Friend! a good great man inherits
  Honor or wealth with all his worth and pains!
It sounds like stories from the land of spirits.
If any man obtain that which he merits,
  Or any merit that which he obtains.

       *       *       *       *       *

For shame, dear Friend; renounce this canting strain!
What wouldst thou have a good great man obtain?
Place--titles--salary--a gilded chain--
Or throne of corses which his sword has slain?
Greatness and goodness are not means, but ends!

Hath he not always treasures, always friends,
The good great man? three treasures,--love, and light,
And calm thoughts, regular as infant's breath;
And three firm friends, more sure than day and night--
Himself, his Maker, and the angel Death.

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.



WHEN MY SHIP COMES IN.


Somewhere, out on the blue seas sailing,
  Where the winds dance and spin;
Beyond the reach of my eager hailing,
  Over the breakers' din;
Out where the dark storm-clouds are lifting,
Out where the blinding fog is drifting,
Out where the treacherous sand is shifting,
  My ship is coming in.

Oh, I have watched till my eyes were aching,
  Day after weary day;
Oh, I have hoped till my heart was breaking,
  While the long nights ebbed away;
Could I but know where the waves had tossed her,
Could I but know what storms had crossed her,
Could I but know where the winds had lost her,
  Out in the twilight gray!

But though the storms her course have altered,
  Surely the port she'll win;
Never my faith in my ship has faltered,
  I know she is coming in.
For through the restless ways of her roaming,
Through the mad rush of the wild waves foaming,
Through the white crest of the billows combing,
  My ship is coming in.

Breasting the tides where the gulls are flying,
  Swiftly she's coming in;
Shallows and deeps and rocks defying,
 Bravely she's coming in;
Precious the love she will bring to bless me,
Snowy the arms she will bring to caress me,
In the proud purple of kings she will dress me.
  My ship that is coming in.

White in the sunshine her sails will be gleaming,
  See, where my ship comes in;
At mast-head and peak her colors streaming,
  Proudly she's sailing in;
Love, hope, and joy on her decks are cheering.
Music will welcome her glad appearing.
And my heart will sing at her stately nearing,
  When my ship comes in.

ROBERT JONES BURDETTE.



NEVER DESPAIR.[6]


Never despair! Let the feeble in spirit
  Bow like the willow that stoops to the blast.
Droop not in peril! 'T is manhood's true merit
  Nobly to struggle and hope to the last.

When by the sunshine of fortune forsaken
  Faint sinks the heart of the feeble with fear,
Stand like the oak of the forest--unshaken,
  Never despair--Boys--oh! never despair.

Never despair! Though adversity rages,

  Fiercely and fell as the surge on the shore,
Firm as the rock of the ocean for ages,
  Stem the rude torrent till danger is o'er.
Fate with its whirlwind our joys may all sever,
  True to ourselves, we have nothing to fear.
Be this our hope and our anchor for ever--
  Never despair--Boys--oh! never despair.

WILLIAM SMITH O'BRIEN.

  [6] These lines were sent to me by William Smith O'Brien, the evening of
Monday, October 8, 1848, the day on which sentence of death was passed
upon him.

THOMAS FRANCIS MEAGHER. October 12, 1848.



THE SADDEST FATE.


  To touch a broken lute,
    To strike a jangled string,
  To strive with tones forever mute
    The dear old tunes to sing--
What sadder fate could any heart befall?
_Alas! dear child, never to sing at all_.

  To sigh for pleasures flown.
    To weep for withered flowers,
  To count the blessings we have known,
    Lost with the vanished hours--
What sadder fate could any heart befall?
_Alas! dear child, ne'er to have known them all_.

  To dream of love and rest,
    To know the dream has past,
To bear within an aching breast
    Only a void at last--
What sadder fate could any heart befall?
_Alas! dear child, ne'er to have loved at all_.

  To trust an unknown good,
    To hope, but all in vain,
  Over a far-off bliss to brood,
    Only to find it pain--
What sadder fate could any soul befall?
_Alas! dear child, never to hope at all_.

ANONYMOUS.



THE SONG OF THE SAVOYARDS.


Far poured past Broadway's lamps alight,
  The tumult of her motley throng.
When high and clear upon the night
  Rose an inspiring song.
And rang above the city's din
To sound of harp and violin;
  A simple but a manly strain,
  And ending with the brave refrain--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

And now where rose that song of cheer.
  Both old and young stood still for joy;
Or from the windows hung to hear
  The children of Savoy:
And many an eye with rapture glowed,
And saddest hearts forgot their load,
  And feeble souls grew strong again,
  So stirring was the brave refrain--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

Alone, with only silence there,
  Awaiting his life's welcome close,
A sick man lay, when on the air
  That clarion arose;
So sweet the thrilling cadence rang,
It seemed to him an angel sang,
  And sang to him; and he would fain
  Have died upon that heavenly strain--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

A sorrow-stricken man and wife,
  With nothing left them but to pray,
Heard streaming over their sad life
  That grand, heroic lay:
And through the mist of happy tears
They saw the promise-laden years;
  And in their joy they sang again,
  And carolled high the fond refrain--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

Two artists, in the cloud of gloom
  Which hung upon their hopes deferred,
Resounding through their garret-room
  That noble chanson heard;
And as the night before the day
Their weak misgivings fled away;
  And with the burden of the strain
  They made their studio ring again--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

Two poets, who in patience wrought
  The glory of an aftertime,--
Lords of an age which knew them not,
  Heard rise that lofty rhyme;
And on their hearts it fell, as falls
The sunshine upon prison-walls;
  And one caught up the magic strain
  And to the other sang again--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

And unto one, who, tired of breath,
  And day and night and name and fame,
Held to his lips a glass of death,
  That song a savior came;
Beseeching him from his despair,
As with the passion of a prayer;
  And kindling in his heart and brain
  The valor of its blest refrain--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

O thou, with earthly ills beset,
  Call to thy lips those words of joy,
And never in thy life forget
  The brave song of Savoy!
For those dear words may have the power
To cheer thee in thy darkest hour;
  The memory of that loved refrain
  Bring gladness to thy heart again!--
Courage! courage, mon camarade!

HENRY AMES BLOOD.

       *       *       *       *       *




V. DEATH AND BEREAVEMENT.



LIFE.


We are born; we laugh; we weep;
  We love; we droop; we die!
Ah! wherefore do we laugh or weep?
  Why do we live or die?
Who knows that secret deep?
  Alas not I!

Why doth the violet spring
  Unseen by human eye?
Why do the radiant seasons bring
  Sweet thoughts that quickly fly?
Why do our fond hearts cling
  To things that die?

We toil--through pain and wrong;
  We fight--and fly;
We love; we lose; and then, ere long,
  Stone-dead we lie,
O life! is all thy song
  "Endure and--die?"

BRYAN WALLER PROCTER _(Barry Cornwall)._



SOLILOQUY ON DEATH.

     FROM "HAMLET," ACT III. SC. I.


HAMLET.--To be, or not to be,--that is the question
Whether 't is nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And, by opposing, end them?--To die, to sleep;--
No more; and, by a sleep, to say we end
The heart-ache, and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to,--'t is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die,--to sleep;--
To sleep! perchance to dream:--ay, there's the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come,
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause: there's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life;
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pains of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,--
The undiscovered country, from whose bourn
No traveller returns,--puzzles the will,
And makes us rather bear those ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience does make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought;
And enterprises of great pith and moment,
With this regard, their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action.

SHAKESPEARE.



SIC VITA.[7]

Like to the falling of a star,
Or as the flights of eagles are,
Or like the fresh spring's gaudy hue,
Or silver drops of morning dew,

Or like a wind that chafes the flood,
Or bubbles which on water stood,--

E'en such is man, whose borrowed light
Is straight called in, and paid to-night.
The wind blows out, the bubble dies,
The spring entombed in autumn lies,
The dew dries up, the star is shot,
The flight is past,--and man forgot!

HENRY KING.

  [7] Claimed for Francis Beaumont by some authorities.



DEATH THE LEVELLER.

[These verses are said to have "chilled the heart" of Oliver Cromwell.]


The glories of our blood and state
  Are shadows, not substantial things;
There is no armor against fate;
  Death lays his icy hand on kings:
    Sceptre and crown
    Must tumble down.
And in the dust be equal made
With the poor crooked scythe and spade.

Some men with swords may reap the field,
  And plant fresh laurels where they kill;
But their strong nerves at last must yield;
  They tame but one another still:
    Early or late,
    They stoop to fate.
And must give up their murmuring breath,
When they, pale captives, creep to death.

The garlands wither on your brow,
  Then boast no more your mighty deeds;
Upon death's purple altar now
  See where the victor-victim bleeds:
    Your heads must come
    To the cold tomb;
Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet, and blossom in their dust.

JAMES SHIRLEY.



VIRTUE IMMORTAL.


Sweet day, so cool, so calm, so bright,
The bridall of the earth and skie;
The dew shall weep thy fall to-night;
  For thou must die.
Sweet Rose, whose hue angrie and brave
Bids the rash gazer wipe his eye,
Thy root is ever in its grave,
  And all must die.

Sweet Spring, full of sweet dayes and roses,
A box where sweets compacted lie,
Thy musick shows ye have your closes,
  And all must die.

Onely a sweet and vertuous soul,
Like seasoned timber, never gives;
But, though the whole world, turn to coal,
  Then chiefly lives.

GEORGE HERBERT.



MAN'S MORTALITY.


  Like as the damask rose you see,
  Or like the blossom on the tree,
  Or like the dainty flower in May,
  Or like the morning of the day,
  Or like the sun, or like the shade,
  Or like the gourd which Jonas had,--
  E'en such is man; whose thread is spun,
  Drawn out, and cut, and so is done.--
The rose withers, the blossom blasteth,
The flower fades, the morning hasteth,
The sun sets, the shadow flies,
The gourd consumes,--and man he dies!

  Like to the grass that's newly sprung,
  Or like a tale that's new begun,
Or like the bird that's here to-day,
  Or like the pearled dew of May,
  Or like an hour, or like a span,
  Or like the singing of a swan,--
  E'en such is man; who lives by breath,
  Is here, now there, in life and death.--
The grass withers, the tale is ended,
The bird is flown, the dew's ascended.
The hour is short, the span is long,
The swan's near death,--man's life is done!

SIMON WASTELL.



MORTALITY.


O why should the spirit of mortal be proud?
Like a fast-flitting meteor, a fast-flying cloud,
A flash of the lightning, a break of the wave,
He passes from life to his rest in the grave.

The leaves of the oak and the willow shall fade,
Be scattered around and together be laid;
And the young and the old, and the low and the high,
Shall moulder to dust and together shall lie.

The child that a mother attended and loved,
The mother that infant's affection that proved,
The husband that mother and infant that blessed,
Each, all, are away to their dwelling of rest.

The maid on whose cheek on whose brow, in whose eye,
Shone beauty and pleasure,--her triumphs are by;
And the memory of those that beloved her and praised
Are alike from the minds of the living erased.

The hand of the king that the sceptre hath borne,
The brow of the priest that the mitre hath worn,
The eye of the sage, and the heart of the brave,
Are hidden and lost in the depths of the grave.

The peasant whose lot was to sow and to reap,
The herdsman who climbed with his goats to the steep,
The beggar that wandered in search of his bread,
Have faded away like the grass that we tread.

The saint that enjoyed the communion of heaven,
The sinner that dared to remain unforgiven,
The wise and the foolish, the guilty and just,
Have quietly mingled their bones in the dust.

So the multitude goes, like the flower and the weed
That wither away to let others succeed;
So the multitude comes, even those we behold,
To repeat every tale that hath often been told.

For we are the same that our fathers have been;
We see the same sights that our fathers have seen,--
We drink the same stream, and we feel the same sun,
And we run the same course that our fathers have run.

The thoughts we are thinking, our fathers would think;
From the death we are shrinking from, they too would shrink;
To the life we are clinging to, they too would cling;
But it speeds from the earth like a bird on the wing.

They loved, but their story we cannot unfold;
They scorned, but the heart of the haughty is cold;
They grieved, but no wail from their slumbers may come;
They joyed, but the voice of their gladness is dumb.

They died, ay! they died! and we things that are now,
Who walk on the turf that lies over their brow,
Who make in their dwellings a transient abode,
Meet the changes they met on their pilgrimage road.

Yea! hope and despondence, and pleasure and pain,
Are mingled together like sunshine and rain;
And the smile and the tear, and the song and the dirge,
Still follow each other, like surge upon surge.

'Tis the wink of an eye, 't is the draught of a breath,
From the blossom of health to the paleness of death,
From the gilded saloon to the bier and the shroud;--
why should the spirit of mortal be proud?

WILLIAM KNOX.




THE HOUR OF DEATH.


    Leaves have their time to fall,
And flowers to wither at the north-wind's breath,
    And stars to set--but all,
Thou hast all seasons for thine own, oh! Death.

    Day is for mortal care,
Eve for glad meetings round the joyous hearth,
  Night for the dreams of sleep, the voice of prayer--
But all for thee, thou mightiest of the earth.

    The banquet hath its hour,
Its feverish hour of mirth, and song, and wine;
  There comes a day of griefs overwhelming power,
A time for softer tears--but all are thine.

    Youth and the opening rose
May look like things too glorious for decay,
  And smile at thee--but thou art not of those
That wait the ripened bloom to seize their prey.

    Leaves have their time to fall,
And flowers to wither at the north-wind's breath,
    And stars to set--but all,
Thou hast all seasons for thine own, oh! Death.

    We know when moons shall wane,
When summer-birds from far shall cross the sea,
  When autumn's hue shall tinge the golden grain--
But who shall teach us when to look for thee?

    Is it when Spring's first gale
Comes forth to whisper where the violets lie?
  Is it when roses in our paths grow pale?
They have _one_ season--_all_ are ours to die!

    Thou art where billows foam,
Thou art where music melts upon the air;
  Thou art around us in our peaceful home,
And the world calls us forth--and thou art there.

    Thou art where friend meets friend,
Beneath the shadow of the elm to rest--
  Thou art where foe meets foe, and trumpets rend
The skies, and swords beat down the princely crest.

    Leaves have their time to fall,
And flowers to wither at the north-wind's breath,
    And stars to set--but all.
Thou hast all seasons for thine own, oh! Death.

FELICIA DOROTHEA HEMANS.



THE TERM OF DEATH.


Between the falling leaf and rose-bud's breath;
  The bird's forsaken nest and her new song
(And this is all the time there is for Death);
  The worm and butterfly--it is not long!

SARAH MORGAN BRYAN PIATT.



A PICTURE OF DEATH.

     FROM "THE GIAOUR."


  He who hath bent him o'er the dead
Ere the first day of death is fled,
The first dark day of nothingness,
The last of danger and distress,
(Before Decay's effacing fingers
Have swept the lines where beauty lingers,)
And marked the mild angelic air,
The rapture of repose, that's there,
The fixed yet tender traits that streak
The languor of the placid cheek,
And--but for that sad shrouded eye,
That fires not, wins not, weeps not now,
And but for that chill, changeless brow,
Where cold Obstruction's apathy
Apalls the gazing mourner's heart,
As if to him it could impart
The doom he dreads, yet dwells upon;
Yes, but for these and these alone,
Some moments, ay, one treacherous hour,
He still might doubt the tyrant's power;
  So fair, so calm, so softly sealed,
  The first, last look by death revealed!
  Such is the aspect of this shore;
  'Tis Greece, but living Greece no more!
  So coldly sweet, so deadly fair,
  We start, for soul is wanting there.
  Hers is the loveliness in death,
  That parts not quite with parting breath;
  But beauty with that fearful bloom,
  That hue which haunts it to the tomb,
  Expression's last receding ray,
  A gilded halo hovering round decay,
  The farewell beam of Feeling past away;
Spark of that flame, perchance of heavenly birth,
Which gleams, but warms no more its cherished earth!

LORD BYRON.



THE TWO MYSTERIES.


["In the middle of the room, in its white coffin, lay the dead child,
the nephew of the poet. Near it, in a great chair, sat Walt Whitman,
surrounded by little ones, and holding a beautiful little girl on his
lap. She looked wonderingly at the spectacle of death, and then
inquiringly into the old man's face. 'You don't know what it is, do you,
my dear?' said he, and added, 'We don't, either.'"]

We know not what it is, dear, this sleep so deep and still;
The folded hands, the awful calm, the cheek so pale and chill;
The lids that will not lift again, though we may call and call;
The strange white solitude of peace that settles over all.

We know not what it means, dear, this desolate heart-pain;
This dread to take our daily way, and walk in it again;
We know not to what other sphere the loved who leave us go,
Nor why we 're left to wonder still, nor why we do not know.

But this we know: Our loved and dead, if they should come this day--
Should come and ask us, "What is life?" not one of us could say.
Life is a mystery, as deep as ever death can be;
Yet, O, how dear it is to us, this life we live and see!

Then might they say--these vanished ones--and blessed is the thought,
"So death is sweet to us, beloved! though we may show you nought;
We may not to the quick reveal the mystery of death--
Ye cannot tell us, if ye would, the mystery of breath."

The child who enters life comes not with knowledge or intent,
So those who enter death must go as little children sent.
Nothing is known. But I believe that God is overhead;
And as life is to the living, so death is to the dead.

MARY MAPLES DODGE.



THANATOPSIS.


 To him who, in the love of Nature, holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks
A various language: for his gayer hours
She has a voice of gladness, and a smile
And eloquence of beauty; and she glides
Into his darker musings with a mild
And healing sympathy, that steals away
Their sharpness, ere he is aware. When thoughts
Of the last bitter hour come like a blight
Over thy spirit, and sad images
Of the stern agony, and shroud, and pall,
And breathless darkness, and the narrow house,
Make thee to shudder, and grow sick at heart,
Go forth under the open sky, and list
To Nature's teachings, while from all around--
Earth and her waters, and the depths of air--
Comes a still voice:--Yet a few days, and thee
The all-beholding sun shall see no more
In all his course; nor yet in the cold ground,
Where thy pale form was laid, with many tears,
Nor in the embrace of ocean, shall exist
Thy image. Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim
Thy growth, to be resolved to earth again;
And, lost each human trace, surrendering up
Thine individual being, shalt thou go
To mix forever with the elements;
To be a brother to the insensible rock,
And to the sluggish clod, which the rude swain
Turns with his share, and treads upon. The oak
Shall send his roots abroad, and pierce thy mold.
 Yet not to thine eternal resting-place
Shalt thou retire alone,--nor couldst thou wish
Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down
With patriarchs of the infant world,--with kings,
The powerful of the earth,--the wise, the good,
Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,
All in one mighty sepulchre. The hills,
Rock-ribbed, and ancient as the sun; the vales
Stretching in pensive quietness between;
The venerable woods; rivers that move
In majesty, and the complaining brooks,
That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,
Old ocean's gray and melancholy waste,--
Are but the solemn decorations all
Of the great tomb of man! The golden sun,
The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,
Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
Through the still lapse of ages. All that tread
The globe are but a handful to the tribes
That slumber in its bosom. Take the wings
Of morning, pierce the Barcan wilderness,
Or lose thyself in the continuous woods
Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound
Save his own dashings,--yet the dead are there!
And millions in those solitudes, since first
The flight of years began, have laid them down
In their last sleep,--the dead reign there alone!
So shalt thou rest; and what if thou withdraw
In silence from the living, and no friend
Take note of thy departure? All that breathe
Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh
When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care
Plod on, and each one, as before, will chase
His favorite phantom; yet all these shall leave
Their mirth and their employments, and shall come
And make their bed with thee. As the long train
Of ages glide away, the sons of men--
The youth in life's green spring, and he who goes
In the full strength of years, matron and maid,
And the sweet babe, and the gray-headed man--
Shall, one by one, be gathered to thy side
By those who in their turn shall follow them.

 So live, that when thy summons comes to join
The innumerable caravan that moves
To the pale realms of shade, where each shall take
His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,
Scourged to his dungeon, but sustained and soothed
By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave
Like one who wraps the drappery of his conch
About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.



A MORNING THOUGHT.


What if some morning, when the stars were paling,
  And the dawn whitened, and the east was clear,
Strange peace and rest fell on me from the presence
  Of a benignant spirit standing near;

And I should tell him, as he stood beside me:--
  "This is our earth--most friendly earth, and fair;
Daily its sea and shore through sun and shadow
  Faithful it turns, robed in its azure air;

"There is blest living here, loving and serving,
  And quest of truth, and serene friendships dear:
But stay not, Spirit! Earth has one destroyer--
  His name is Death: flee, lest he find thee here!"

And what if then, while the still morning brightened,
  And freshened in the elm the summer's breath,
Should gravely smile on me the gentle angel,
  And take my hand and say, "My name is Death"?

EDWARD ROWLAND SILL.



NOW AND AFTERWARDS.

     "Two hands upon the breast, and labor is past."
             --RUSSIAN PROVERB.


"Two hands upon the breast,
  And labor's done;
Two pale feet crossed in rest,--
  The race is won;
Two eyes with coin-weights shut,
  And all tears cease;
Two lips where grief is mute,
  Anger at peace:"
So pray we oftentimes, mourning our lot;
God in his kindness answereth not.

"Two hands to work addrest
  Aye for his praise;
Two feet that never rest
  Walking his ways;
Two eyes that look above
  Through all their tears;
Two lips still breathing love,
  Not wrath, nor fears:"
So pray we afterwards, low on our knees;
Pardon those erring prayers! Father, hear these!

DINAH MARIA MULOCK CRAIK



THE GRAVE OF SOPHOCLES.


Tenderly, ivy, on Sophocles' grave--right tenderly--twine
Garlanding over the mound network of delicate green.

Everywhere flourish the flower of the rose, and the clustering vine
Pour out its branches around, wet with their glistering sheen.

All for the sake of the wisdom and grace it was his to combine;
Priest of the gay and profound, sweetest of singers terrene.

From the Greek of SIMMIAS.
Translation of WILLIAM M. HAUDINGE.



INSCRIPTION ON MELROSE ABBEY.


The earth goes on the earth glittering in gold,
The earth goes to the earth sooner than it wold;
The earth builds on the earth castles and towers,
The earth says to the earth--All this is ours.



ON THE TOMBS IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY.


Mortality, behold and fear
What a change of flesh is here!
Think how many royal bones
Sleep within these heaps of stones;
Here they lie, had realms and lands,
Who now want strength to stir their hands,
Where from their pulpits sealed with dust
They preach, "In greatness is no trust."
Here's an acre sown indeed
With the richest royallest seed
That the earth did e'er suck in
Since the first man died for sin:
Here the bones of birth have cried
"Though gods they were, as men they died!"
Here are sands, ignoble things,
Dropt from the ruined sides of kings:
Here's a world of pomp and state
Buried in dust, once dead by fate.

FRANCIS BEAUMONT.



ELEGY WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.


The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
  The lowing herd wind slowly o'er the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his weary way,
  And leaves the world to darkness and to me.

Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight.
  And all the air a solemn stillness holds,
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
  And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds:

Save that, from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
  The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such as, wandering near her secret bower,
  Molest her ancient solitary reign.

[Hark! how the holy calm that breathes around
  Bids every fierce tumultuous passion cease;
In still small accents whispering from the ground
  The grateful earnest of eternal peace.][8]

Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade.
  Where heaves the turf in many a moldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell forever laid,
  The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.

The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
  The swallow twittering from the straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
  No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.

For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
  Or busy housewife ply her evening care;
No children run to lisp their sire's return,
  Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.

Oft did the harvest to their sickle yield,
  Their furrow oft the stubborn glebe has broke;
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
  How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!

Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
  Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
  The short and simple annals of the poor.

The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
  And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave,
Awaits alike the inevitable hour.
  The paths of glory lead but to the grave.

Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
  If Memory o'er their tomb no trophies raise,
Where, through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault,
  The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.

Can storied urn or animated bust:
  Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
  Or flattery soothe the dull, cold ear of death?

Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid;
  Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have swayed,
  Or waked to ecstasy the living lyre;

But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
  Rich with the spoils of time, did ne'er unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
  And froze the genial current of the soul.

Full many a gem of purest ray serene;
  The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
  And waste its sweetness on the desert air.

Some village Hampden, that, with dauntless breast,
  The little tryant of his fields withstood,
Some mute, inglorious Milton here may rest,
  Some Cromwell, guiltless of his country's blood.

Th' applause of listening senates to command,
  The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty o'er a smiling land,
  And read their history in a nation's eyes,

Their lot forbade: nor circumscribed alone
  Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined;
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
  And shut the gates of mercy on mankind,

The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
  To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
  With incense kindled at the muse's flame.

Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
  Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life
  They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.

Yet even these bones from insult to protect,
  Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked,
  Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.

Their name, their years, spelt by th' unlettered muse,
  The place of fame and elegy supply;
And many a holy text around she strews,
  That teach the rustic moralist to die.

For who, to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
  This pleasing anxious being e'er resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
  Nor cast one longing lingering look behind?

On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
  Some pious drops the closing eye requires;
E'en from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
  E'en in our ashes live their wonted fires.

For thee, who, mindful of th' unhonored dead,
  Dost in these lines their artless tale relate,
If chance, by lonely contemplation led,
  Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate,

Haply some hoary-headed swain may say,
  "Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
Brushing with hasty steps the dews away,
  To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.

"There at the foot of yonder nodding beech,
  That wreathes its old, fantastic roots so high,
His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
  And pore upon the brook that babbles by.

"Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
  Muttering his wayward fancies he would rove;
Now drooping, woful-wan, like one forlorn.
  Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopeless love.

"One morn I missed him on the customed hill,
  Along the heath, and near his favorite tree;
Another came; nor yet beside the rill,
  Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he;

"The next, with dirges due in sad array,
  Slow through the church-way path we saw him borne.
Approach and read (for thou canst read) the lay
  Graved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn."

     THE EPITAPH.

Here rests his head upon the lap of Earth
  A youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown;
Fair Science frowned not on his humble birth,
  And Melancholy marked him for her own.

Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
  Heaven did a recompense as largely send;
He gave to Misery all he had, a tear,
  He gained from Heaven ('t was all he wished) a friend.

No farther seek his merits to disclose,
  Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
  The bosom of his Father and his God.

THOMAS GRAY.

  [8] Removed by the author from the original poem.



GOD'S-ACRE.


I like that ancient Saxon phrase which calls
  The burial-ground God's-Acre! It is just;
It consecrates each grave within its walls,
  And breathes a benison o'er the sleeping dust.

God's Acre! Yes, that blessed name imparts
  Comfort to those who in the grave have sown
The seed that they had garnered in their hearts,
  Their bread of life, alas! no more their own.

Into its furrows shall we all be cast,
  In the sure faith that we shall rise again
At the great harvest, when the archangel's blast
  Shall winnow, like a fan, the chaff and grain.

Then shall the good stand in immortal bloom,
  In the fair gardens of that second birth;
And each bright blossom mingle its perfume
  With that of flowers which never bloomed on earth.

With thy rude ploughshare, Death, turn up the sod,
  And spread the furrow for the seed we sow;
This is the field and Acre of our God,
  This is the place where human harvests grow!

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



SLEEPY HOLLOW.


No abbey's gloom, nor dark cathedral-stoops,
  No winding torches paint the midnight air;
Here the green pines delight, the aspen droops
  Along the modest pathways, and those fair
Pale asters of the season spread their plumes
  Around this field, fit garden for our tombs.

And shalt thou pause to hear some funeral bell
  Slow stealing o'er thy heart in this calm place,
Not with a throb of pain, a feverish knell,
  But in its kind and supplicating grace,
It says, Go, pilgrim, on thy march, be more
  Friend to the friendless than thou wast before;

Learn from the loved one's rest serenity:
  To-morrow that soft bell for thee shall sound,
And thou repose beneath the whispering tree,
  One tribute more to this submissive ground;--
Prison thy soul from malice, bar out pride,
  Nor these pale flowers nor this still field deride:

Rather to those ascents of being turn,
  Where a ne'er-setting sun illumes the year
Eternal, and the incessant watch-fires burn
  Of unspent holiness and goodness clear,--
Forget man's littleness, deserve the best,
  God's mercy in thy thought and life confest.

WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING.



THE QUAKER GRAVEYARD.


Four straight brick walls, severely plain,
  A quiet city square surround;
A level space of nameless graves,--
  The Quakers' burial-ground.

In gown of gray, or coat of drab,
  They trod the common ways of life,
With passions held in sternest leash,
  And hearts that knew not strife.

To yon grim meeting-house they fared,
  With thoughts as sober as their speech,
To voiceless prayer, to songless praise,
  To hear the elders preach.

Through quiet lengths of days they came,
  With scarce a change to this repose;
Of all life's loveliness they took
  The thorn without the rose.

But in the porch and o'er the graves,
  Glad rings the southward robin's glee,
And sparrows fill the autumn air
  With merry mutiny;

While on the graves of drab and gray
  The red and gold of autumn lie,
And wilful Nature decks the sod
  In gentlest mockery.

SILAS WEIR MITCHELL.



GREENWOOD CEMETERY.


How calm they sleep beneath the shade
  Who once were weary of the strife,
And bent, like us, beneath the load
    Of human life!

The willow hangs with sheltering grace
  And benediction o'er their sod,
And Nature, hushed, assures the soul
    They rest in God.

O weary hearts, what rest is here,
  From all that curses yonder town!
So deep the peace, I almost long
    To lay me down.

For, oh, it will be blest to sleep,
  Nor dream, nor move, that silent night,
Till wakened in immortal strength
     And heavenly light!

CRAMMOND KENNEDY.



THE DEAD.


The dead abide with us! Though stark and cold
Earth seems to grip them, they are with us still:
They have forged our chains of being for good or ill;
And their invisible hands these hands yet hold.
Our perishable bodies are the mould
In which their strong imperishable will--
Mortality's deep yearning to fulfil--
Hath grown incorporate through dim time untold.
Vibrations infinite of life in death,
As a star's travelling light survives its star!
So may we hold our lives, that when we are
The fate of those who then will draw this breath,
They shall not drag us to their judgment-bar,
And curse the heritage which we bequeath.

MATHILDE BLIND.



ON A GRAVE AT GRINDELWALD.


Here let us leave him; for his shroud the snow,
  For funeral-lamps he has the planets seven,
For a great sign the icy stair shall go
  Between the heights to heaven.

One moment stood he as the angels stand,
  High in the stainless eminence of air;
The next, he was not, to his fatherland
  Translated unaware.

FREDERIC WILLIAM HENRY MYERS.



THE EMIGRANT LASSIE.


As I came wandering down Glen Spean,
  Where the braes are green and grassy,
With my light step I overtook
  A weary-footed lassie.

She had one bundle on her back,
  Another in her hand,
And she walked as one who was full loath
  To travel from the land.

Quoth I, "My bonnie lass!"--for she
  Had hair of flowing gold,
And dark brown eyes, and dainty limbs,
  Right pleasant to behold--

"My bonnie lass, what aileth thee,
  On this bright summer day,
To travel sad and shoeless thus
  Upon the stony way?

"I'm fresh and strong, and stoutly shod,
  And thou art burdened so;
March lightly now, and let me bear
  The bundles as we go."

"No, no!" she said, "that may not be;
  What's mine is mine to bear;
Of good or ill, as God may will,
  I take my portioned share."

"But you have two, and I have none;
  One burden give to me;
I'll take that bundle from thy back
  That heavier seems to be.

"No, no!" she said; "_this_, if you will,
  _That_ holds--no hand but mine
May bear its weight from dear Glen Spean
  'Cross the Atlantic brine!"

"Well, well! but tell me what may be
  Within that precious load,
Which thou dost bear with such fine care
  Along the dusty road?

"Belike it is some present rare
  From friend in parting hour;
Perhaps, as prudent maidens wont,
  Thou tak'st with thee thy dower"

She drooped her head, and with her hand
  She gave a mournful wave:
"Oh, do not jest, dear sir!--it is
  Turf from my mother's grave!"

I spoke no word: we sat and wept
  By the road-side together;
No purer dew on that bright day
  Was dropped upon the heather.

JOHN STUART BLACKIE.



THE OLD SEXTON.


Nigh to a grave that was newly made,
Leaned a sexton old on his earth-worn spade;
His work was done, and he paused to wait
The funeral train at the open gate.
A relic of bygone days was he,
And his locks were white as the foamy sea;
And these words came from his lips so thin:
"I gather them in: I gather them in.

"I gather them in! for man and boy,
Year after year of grief and joy,
I 've builded the houses that lie around,
In every nook of this burial ground;
Mother and daughter, father and son,
Come to my solitude, one by one:
But come they strangers or come they kin--
I gather them in, I gather them in.

"Many are with me, but still I'm alone,
I'm king of the dead--and I make my throne
On a monument slab of marble cold;
And my sceptre of rule is the spade I hold:
Come they from cottage or come they from hall,
Mankind are my subjects, all, all, all!
Let them loiter in pleasure or toilfully spin--
I gather them in, I gather them in.

"I gather them in, and their-final rest
Is here, down here, in earth's dark breast!"
And the sexton ceased, for the funeral train
Wound mutely o'er that solemn plain!
And I said to my heart, when time is told,
A mightier voice than that sexton's old
Will sound o'er the last trump's dreadful din--
"I gather them in, I gather them in."

PARK BENJAMIN.



THE FIRST SNOW-FALL.


The snow had begun in the gloaming,
  And busily all the night
Had been heaping field and highway
  With a silence deep and white.
Every pine and fir and hemlock
  Wore ermine too dear for an earl,
And the poorest twig on the elm-tree
  Was ridged inch deep with pearl.

From sheds new-roofed with Carrara
  Came Chanticleer's muffled crow.
The stiff rails were softened to swan's-down,
  And still fluttered down the snow.

I stood and watched by the window
  The noiseless work of the sky,
And the sudden flurries of snow-birds,
  Like brown leaves whirling by.

I thought of a mound in sweet Auburn
  Where a little headstone stood;
How the flakes were folding it gently,
  As did robins the babes in the wood.

Up spoke our own little Mabel,
  Saying, "Father, who makes it snow?"
And I told of the good All-father
  Who cares for us here below.

Again I looked at the snow-fall,
  And thought of the leaden sky
That arched o'er our first great sorrow,
  When that mound was heaped so high.

I remember the gradual patience
  That fell from that cloud like snow,
Flake by flake, healing and hiding
  The scar of our deep-plunged woe.

And again to the child I whispered,
  "The snow that husheth all,
Darling, the merciful Father
  Alone can make it fall!"

Then, with eyes that saw not, I kissed her;
  And she, kissing back, could not know
That _my_ kiss was given to her sister,
  Folded close under deepening snow.

JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.



THE MORNING-GLORY.


We wreathed about our darling's head
  The morning-glory bright;
Her little face looked out beneath
  So full of life and light,
So lit as with a sunrise,
  That we could only say,
"She is the morning-glory true,
  And her poor types are they."

So always from that happy time
  We called her by their name,
And very fitting did it seem,--
  For sure as morning came,
Behind her cradle bars she smiled
  To catch the first faint ray,
As from the trellis smiles the flower
  And opens to the day.

But not so beautiful they rear
  Their airy cups of blue,
As turned her sweet eyes to the light,
  Brimmed with sleep's tender dew;
And not so close their tendrils fine
  Round their supports are thrown,
As those dear arms whose outstretched plea
  Clasped all hearts to her own.

We used to think how she had come,
  Even as comes the flower,
The last and perfect added gift
  To crown Love's morning hour;
And how in her was imaged forth
  The love we could not say,
As on the little dewdrops round
  Shines back the heart of day.

We never could have thought, O God,
  That she must wither up,
Almost before a day was flown,
  Like the morning-glory's cup;
We never thought to see her droop
  Her fair and noble head,
Till she lay stretched before our eyes,
  Wilted, and cold, and dead!

The morning-glory's blossoming
  Will soon be coming round,--
We see their rows of heart-shaped leaves
  Upspringing from the ground;
The tender things the winter killed
  Renew again their birth,
But the glory of our morning
  Has passed away from earth.

Earth! in vain our aching eyes
  Stretch over thy green plain!
Too harsh thy dews, too gross thine air,
  Her spirit to sustain;
But up in groves of Paradise
  Full surely we shall see
Our morning-glory beautiful
  Twine round our dear Lord's knee.

MARIA WHITE LOWELL.



THE WIDOW'S MITE.


A widow--she had only one!
A puny and decrepit son;
  But, day and night,
Though fretful oft, and weak and small,
A loving child, he was her all--
  The Widow's Mite.

The Widow's Mite--ay, so sustained,
She battled onward, nor complained,
  Though friends were fewer:
And while she toiled for daily fare,
A little crutch upon the stair
  Was music to her.

I saw her then,--and now I see
That, though resigned and cheerful, she
  Has sorrowed much:
She has, He gave it tenderly,
Much faith; and carefully laid by,
  The little crutch.

FREDERICK LOCKER-LAMPSON.



ARE THE CHILDREN AT HOME?


Each day, when the glow of sunset
  Fades in the western sky,
And the wee ones, tired of playing,
  Go tripping lightly by,
I steal away from my husband,
  Asleep in his easy-chair,
And watch from the open door-way
  Their faces fresh and fair.

Alone in the dear old homestead
  That once was full of life,
Ringing with girlish laughter,
  Echoing boyish strife,
We two are waiting together;
  And oft, as the shadows come,
With tremulous voice he calls me,
  "It is night! are the children home?"

"Yes, love!" I answer him gently,
  "They're all home long ago;"--
And I sing, in my quivering treble,
  A song so soft and low,
Till the old man drops to slumber,
  With his head upon his hand,
And I tell to myself the number
  At home in the better land.

At home, where never a sorrow
   Shall dim their eyes with tears!
Where the smile of God is on them
   Through all the summer years!
I know,--yet my arms are empty,
   That fondly folded seven,
And the mother heart within me
   Is almost starved for heaven.

Sometimes, in the dusk of evening,
   I only shut my eyes,
And the children are all about me,
   A vision from the skies:
The babes whose dimpled fingers
   Lost the way to my breast,
And the beautiful ones, the angels,
   Passed to the world of the blest.

With never a cloud upon them,
   I see their radiant brows;
My boys that I gave to freedom,--
   The red sword sealed their vows!
In a tangled Southern forest,
   Twin brothers bold and brave,
They fell; and the flag they died for,
   Thank God! floats over their grave.

A breath, and the vision is lifted
   Away on wings of light,
And again we two are together,
   All alone in the night.
They tell me his mind is failing,
   But I smile at idle fears;
He is only back with the children,
   In the dear and peaceful years.

And still, as the summer sunset
   Fades away in the west,
And the wee ones, tired of playing,
   Go trooping home to rest,
My husband calls from his corner,
   "Say, love, have the children come?"
And I answer, with eyes uplifted,
   "Yes, dear! they are all at home."

MARGARET E.M. SANGSTER.



JIM'S KIDS.


Jim was a fisherman, up on the hill,
   Over the beach lived he and his wife,
In a little house--you can see it still--
   An' their two fair boys; upon my life
You never seen two likelier kids,
   In spite of their antics an' tricks an' noise,
   Than them two boys!

Jim would go out in his boat on the sea,
   Just as the rest of us fishermen did,
An' when he come back at night thar'd be,
   Up to his knees in the surf, each kid,
A beck'nin' and cheer-in' to fisherman Jim;
   He'd hear 'em, you bet, above the roar
   Of the waves on the shore.

But one night Jim came a sailin' home
   And the little kids weren't on the sands;
Jim kinder wondered they hadn't come,
 And a tremblin' took hold o' his knees and hands,
And he learnt the worst up on the hill,
  In the little house, an' he bowed his head,
  "The fever," they said.

'T was an awful time for fisherman Jim,
  With them darlin's a dyin' afore his eyes,
They kep' a callin' an' beck'nin' him,
  For they kinder wandered in mind. Their cries
Were about the waves and fisherman Jim
  And the little boat a sailin' for shore
  Till they spoke no more.

Well, fisherman Jim lived on and on,
  And his hair grew white and the wrinkles came,
But he never smiled and his heart seemed gone,
  And he never was heard to speak the name
Of the little kids who were buried there,
  Upon the hill in sight o' the sea,
  Under a willow tree.

One night they came and told me to haste
  To the house on the hill, for Jim was sick,
And they said I hadn't no time to waste,
  For his tide was ebbin' powerful quick
An' he seemed to be wand'rin' and crazy like,
  An' a seein' sights he oughtn't to see,
  An' had called for me.

And fisherman Jim sez he to me,
  "It's my last, last cruise, you understand,
I'm sailin' a dark and dreadful sea,
  But off on the further shore, on the sand,
Are the kids, who's a beck'nin' and callin' my name
  Jess as they did, oh, mate, you know,
  In the long ago."

No, sir! he wasn't afeard to die,
  For all that night he seemed to see
His little boys of the years gone by,
  And to hear sweet voices forgot by me;
An' just as the mornin' sun came up,
  "They're a holdin' me by the hands," he cried,
  And so he died.

EUGENE FIELD.



THE MAY QUEEN.


You must wake and call me early, call me early, mother dear;
To-morrow'll be the happiest time of all the glad new-year,--
Of all the glad new-year, mother, the maddest, merriest day;
For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

There's many a black, black eye, they say, but _none_ so bright as mine;
There's Margaret and Mary, there's Kate and Caroline;
But none so fair as little Alice in all the land, they say:
So I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

I sleep so sound all night, mother, that I shall never wake,
If you do not call me loud when the day begins to break;
But I must gather knots of flowers and buds, and garlands gay;
For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

As I came up the valley, whom think ye should I see
But Robin leaning on the bridge beneath the hazel-tree?
He thought of that sharp look, mother, I gave him yesterday,--
But I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

He thought I was a ghost, mother, for I was all in white;
And I ran by him without speaking, like a flash of light.
They call me cruel-hearted, but I care not what they say,
For I'm to be Queen o' the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o' the May.

They say he's dying all for love,--but that can never be;
They say his heart is breaking, mother,--what is that to me?
There's many a bolder lad'll woo me any summer day;
And I'm to be Queen o'the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o'the May.

Little Effie shall go with me to-morrow to the green,
And you'll be there, too, mother, to see me made the Queen;
For the shepherd lads on every side'll come from far away;
And I'm to be Queen o'the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o'the May.

The honeysuckle round the porch has woven its wavy bowers,
And by the meadow-trenches blow the faint sweet cuckoo-flowers;
And the wild marsh-marigold shines like fire in swamps and hollows gray;
And I'm to be Queen o'the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o'the May.

The night-winds come and go, mother, upon the meadow-grass,
And the happy stars above them seem to brighten as they pass;
There will not be a drop of rain the whole of the livelong day;
And I'm to be Queen o'the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o'the May.

All the valley, mother, 'll be fresh and green and still,
And the cowslip and the crowfoot are over all the hill,
And the rivulet in the flowery dale'll merrily glance and play,
For I'm to be Queen o'the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o'the May.

So you must wake and call me early, call me early, mother dear;
To-morrow'll be the happiest time of all the glad new-year;
To-morrow'll be of all the year the maddest, merriest day,
For I'm to be Queen o'the May, mother, I'm to be Queen o'the May.


NEW YEAR'S EVE.

If you're waking, call me early, call me early, mother dear,
For I would see the sun rise upon the glad new-year.
It is the last new-year that I shall ever see,--
Then you may lay me low i' the mold, and think no more of me.

To-night I saw the sun set,--he set and left behind
The good old year, the dear old time, and all my peace of mind;
And the new-year's coming up, mother; but I shall never see
The blossom on the blackthorn, the leaf upon the tree.

Last May we made a crown of flowers; we had a merry day,--
Beneath the hawthorn on the green they made me Queen of May;
And we danced about the May-pole and in the hazel copse,
Till Charles's Wain came out above the tall white chimney-tops.

There's not a flower on all the hills,--the frost is on the pane;
I only wish to live till the snowdrops come again.
I wish the snow would melt and the sun come out on high,--
I long to see a flower so before the day I die.

The building-rook'll caw from the windy tall elm-tree,
And the tufted plover pipe along the fallow lea,
And the swallow'll come back again with summer o'er the wave,
But I shall lie alone, mother, within the moldering grave.

Upon the chancel casement, and upon that grave of mine,
In the early, early morning the summer sun'll shine,
Before the red cock crows from the farm upon the hill,--
When you are warm-asleep, mother, and all the world is still.

When the flowers come again, mother, beneath the waning light
You'll never see me more in the long gray fields at night;
When from the dry dark wold the summer airs blow cool
On the oat-grass and the sword-grass, and the bulrush in the pool.

You'll bury me, my mother, just beneath the hawthorn shade,
And you'll come sometimes and see me where I am lowly laid.
I shall not forget you, mother; I shall hear you when you pass,
With your feet above my head in the long and pleasant grass.

I have been wild and wayward, but you'll forgive me now;
You'll kiss me, my own mother, upon my cheek and brow;
Nay, nay, you must not weep, nor let your grief be wild;
You should not fret for me, mother--you have another child.

If I can, I'll come again, mother, from out my resting-place;
Though you'll not see me, mother, I shall look upon your face;
Though I cannot speak a word, I shall harken what you say.
And be often, often with you when you think I'm far away.

Good night! good night! when I have said good night forevermore,
And you see me carried out from the threshold of the door,
Don't let Effie come to see me till my grave be growing green,--
She'll be a better child to you than ever I have been.

She'll find my garden tools upon the granary floor.
Let her take 'em--they are hers; I shall never garden more.
But tell her, when I'm gone, to train the rosebush that I set
About the parlor window and the box of mignonette.

Good night, sweet-mother! Call me before the day is born.
All night I lie awake, but I fall asleep at morn;
But I would see the sun rise upon the glad new-year,--
So, if you're waking, call me, call me early, mother dear.


CONCLUSION.

I thought to pass away before, and yet alive I am;
And in the fields all around I hear the bleating of the lamb.
How sadly, I remember, rose the morning of the year!
To die before the snowdrop came, and now the violet's here.

O, sweet is the new violet, that comes beneath the skies;
And sweeter is the young lamb's voice to me that cannot rise;
And sweet is all the land about, and all the flowers that blow;
And sweeter far is death than life, to me that long to go.

It seemed so hard at first, mother, to leave the blessed sun,
And now it seems as hard to stay; and yet, His will be done!
But still I think it can't be long before I find release;
And that good man, the clergyman, has told me words of peace.

O, blessings on his kindly voice, and on his silver hair,
And blessings on his whole life long, until he meet me there!
O, blessings on his kindly heart and on his silver head!
A thousand times I blest him, as he knelt beside my bed.

He taught me all the mercy, for he showed me all the sin;
Now, though my lamp was lighted late, there's One will let me in.
Nor would I now be well, mother, again, if that could be;
For my desire is but to pass to Him that died for me.

I did not hear the dog howl, mother, or the death-watch beat,--
There came a sweeter token when the night and morning meet;
But sit beside my bed, mother, and put your hand in mine,
And Effie on the other side, and I will tell the sign.


All in the wild March-morning I heard the angels call,--
It was when the moon was setting, and the dark was over all;
The trees began to whisper, and the wind began to roll,
And in the wild March-morning I heard them call my soul.

For, lying broad awake, T thought of you and Effie dear;
I saw you sitting in the house, and I no longer here;
With all my strength I prayed for both,--and so I felt resigned,
And up the valley came a swell of music on the wind.

I thought that it was fancy, and I listened in my bed;
And then did something speak to me,--I know not what was said;
For great delight and shuddering took hold of all my mind,
And up the valley came again the music on the wind.

But you were sleeping; and I said, "It's not for them,--it's mine;"
And if it comes three times, I thought, I take it for a sign.
And once again it came, and close beside the window-bars;
Then seemed to go right up to heaven and die among the stars.

So now I think my time is near; I trust it is. I know
The blessed music went that way my soul will have to go.
And for myself, indeed, I care not if I go to-day;
But Effie, you must comfort _her_ when I am past away.
And say to Robin a kind word, and tell him not to fret;
There's many a worthier than I, would make him happy yet.
If I had lived--I cannot tell--I might have been his wife;
But all these things have ceased to be, with my desire of life.

O, look! the sun begins to rise! the heavens are in a glow;
He shines upon a hundred fields, and all of them I know.
And there I move no longer now, and there his light may shine,--
Wild flowers in the valley for other hands than mine.

O, sweet and strange it seems to me, that ere this day is done
The voice that now is speaking may be beyond the sun,--
Forever and forever with those just souls and true,--
And what is life, that we should moan? why make we such ado?

Forever and forever, all in a blessed home,--
And there to wait a little while till you and Effie come,--
To lie within the light of God, as I lie upon your breast,--
And the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



ON ANNE ALLEN.


The wind blew keenly from the Western sea,
And drove the dead leaves slanting from the tree--
   Vanity of vanities, the Preacher saith--
Heaping them up before her Father's door
When I saw her whom I shall see no more--
   We cannot bribe thee, Death.

She went abroad the falling leaves among,
She saw the merry season fade, and sung--
   Vanity of vanities the Preacher saith--
Freely she wandered in the leafless wood,
And said that all was fresh, and fair, and good--
   She knew thee not, O Death.

She bound her shining hair across her brow,
She went into the garden fading now;
   Vanity of vanities the Preacher saith--
And if one sighed to think that it was sere,
She smiled to think that it would bloom next year!
   She feared thee not, O Death.

Blooming she came back to the cheerful room
With all the fairer flowers yet in bloom--
   Vanity of vanities the Preacher saith--
A fragrant knot for each of us she tied,
And placed the fairest at her Father's side--
   She cannot charm thee, Death.

Her pleasant smile spread sunshine upon all;
We heard her sweet clear laughter in the Hall--
  Vanity of vanities the Preacher saith--
We heard her sometimes after evening prayer,
As she went singing softly up the stair--
  No voice can charm thee, Death.

Where is the pleasant smile, the laughter kind,
That made sweet music of the winter wind?
  Vanity of vanities the Preacher saith--
Idly they gaze upon her empty place,
Her kiss hath faded from her Father's face--
  She is with thee, O Death.

EDWARD FITZGERALD.



SONNET.

     (SUGGESTED BY MR. WATTS'S PICTURE OF LOVE AND DEATH.)


Yea, Love is strong as life; he casts out fear,
And wrath, and hate, and all our envious foes;
He stands upon the threshold, quick to close
The gate of happiness ere should appear
Death's dreaded presence--ay, but Death draws near,
And large and gray the towering outline grows,
Whose face is veiled and hid; and yet Love knows
Full well, too well, alas! that Death is here.
Death tramples on the roses; Death comes in,
Though Love, with outstretched arms and wings outspread,
Would bar the way--poor Love, whose wings begin
To droop, half-torn as are the roses dead
Already at his feet--but Death must win,
And Love grows faint beneath that ponderous tread!

LADY LINDSAY.



JEUNE FILLE ET JEUNE FLEUR.


The bier descends, the spotless roses too,
  The father's tribute in his saddest hour:
O Earth! that bore them both, thou hast thy due,--
        The fair young girl and flower.

Give them not back unto a world again,
  Where mourning, grief, and agony have power,--
Where winds destroy, and suns malignant reign,--
        That fair young girl and flower.

Lightly thou sleepest, young Eliza, now,
  Nor fear'st the burning heat, nor chilling shower;
They both have perished in their morning glow,--
        The fair young girl and flower.

But he, thy sire, whose furrowed brow is pale,
  Bends, lost in sorrow, o'er thy funeral bower,
And Time the old oak's roots doth now assail,
        O fair young girl and flower!

From the French of FRANCOIS AUGUSTE, VICOMTE DE CHATEAUBRIAND.



THE DEATH-BED.


We watched her breathing through the night,
  Her breathing soft and low,
As in her breast the wave of life
  Kept heaving to and fro.

So silently we seemed to speak,
  So slowly moved about,
As we had lent her half our powers
  To eke her living out.

Our very hopes belied our fears,
  Our fears our hopes belied--
We thought her dying when she slept,
  And sleeping when she died.

For when the morn came, dim and sad,
  And chill with early showers,
Her quiet eyelids closed--she had
  Another morn than ours.

THOMAS HOOD.



A DEATH-BED.


Her suffering ended with the day;
  Yet lived she at its close,
And breathed the long, long night away,
  In statue-like repose.

But when the sun, in all his state,
  Illumed the eastern skies,
She passed through glory's morning-gate,
   And walked in Paradise!

JAMES ALDRICH.



REQUIESCAT.


Strew on her roses, roses,
   And never a spray of yew.
In quiet she reposes:
   Ah! would that I did too.

Her mirth the world required:
   She bathed it in smiles of glee.
But her heart was tired, tired,
   And now they let her be.

Her life was turning, turning,
   In mazes of heat and sound.
But for peace her soul was yearning,
   And now peace laps her round.

Her cabined, ample Spirit,
   It fluttered and failed for breath.
To-night it doth inherit
   The vasty Hall of Death.

MATTHEW ARNOLD.



"THE UNILLUMINED VERGE."

     TO A FRIEND DYING.


They tell you that Death's at the turn of the road,
   That under the shade of a cypress you'll find him,
And, struggling on wearily, lashed by the goad
   Of pain, you will enter the black mist behind him.

I can walk with you up to the ridge of the hill,
   And we'll talk of the way we have come through the valley;
Down below there a bird breaks into a trill,
   And a groaning slave bends to the oar of his galley.

You are up on the heights now, you pity the slave--
   "Poor soul, how fate lashes him on at his rowing!
Yet it's joyful to live, and it's hard to be brave
   When you watch the sun sink and the daylight is going."

We are almost there--our last walk on this height--
   I must bid you good-bye at that cross on the mountain.
See the sun glowing red, and the pulsating light
   Fill the valley, and rise like the flood in a fountain!

And it shines in your face and illumines your soul;
  We are comrades as ever, right here at your going;
You may rest if you will within sight of the goal,
  While I must return to my oar and the rowing.

We must part now? Well, here is the hand of a friend;
  I will keep you in sight till the road makes its turning
Just over the ridge within reach of the end
  Of your arduous toil,--the beginning of learning.

You will call to me once from the mist, on the verge,
  "An revoir!" and "Good night!" while the twilight is creeping
Up luminous peaks, and the pale stars emerge?
  Yes, I hear your faint voice: "This is rest, and like sleeping!"

ROBERT BRIDGES (_Droch_).



CORONACH.

     FROM "THE LADY OF THE LAKE," CANTO III.


He is gone on the mountain,
  He is lost to the forest,
Like a summer-dried fountain
  When our need was the sorest.
The font, reappearing,
  From the rain-drops shall borrow,
But to us comes no cheering,
  To Duncan no morrow:

The hand of the reaper
  Takes the ears that are hoary;
But the voice of the weeper
  Wails manhood in glory.
The autumn winds rushing
  Waft the leaves that are searest,
But our flower was in flushing
  When blighting was nearest.

Fleet foot on the correi,
  Sage counsel in cumber,
Red hand in the foray,
  How sound is thy slumber!
Like the dew on the mountain,
  Like the foam on the river,
Like the bubble on the fountain,
  Thou art gone, and forever!

SIR WALTER SCOTT.



EVELYN HOPE.


Beautiful Evelyn Hope is dead!
  Sit and watch by her side an hour.
That is her book-shelf, this her bed;
  She plucked that piece of geranium-flower,
Beginning to die too, in the glass.
  Little has yet been changed, I think;
The shutters are shut,--no light may pass
   Save two long rays through the hinge's chink.

Sixteen years old when she died!
   Perhaps she had scarcely heard my name,--
It was not her time to love; beside,
   Her life had many a hope and aim,
Duties enough and little cares;
   And now was quiet, now astir,--
Till God's hand beckoned unawares,
   And the sweet white brow is all of her.

Is it too late, then, Evelyn Hope?
   What! your soul was pure and true;
The good stars met in your horoscope,
   Made you of spirit, fire, and dew;
And just because I was thrice as old,
   And our paths in the world diverged so wide,
Each was naught to each, must I be told?
   We were fellow-mortals,--naught beside?

No, indeed! for God above
   Is great to grant as mighty to make,
And creates the love to reward the love;
   I claim you still, for my own love's sake!
Delayed, it may be, for more lives yet,
   Through worlds I shall traverse, not a few;
Much is to learn and much to forget
   Ere the time be come for taking you.

But the time will come--at last it will--
   When, Evelyn Hope, what meant, I shall say,
In the lower earth,--in the years long still,--
  That body and soul so pure and gay?
Why your hair was amber I shall divine,
  And your mouth of your own geranium's red,--
And what you would do with me, in fine,
  In the new life come in the old one's stead.

I have lived, I shall say, so much since then,
  Given up myself so many times,
Gained me the gains of various men.
  Ransacked the ages, spoiled the climes;
Yet one thing--one--in my soul's full scope,
  Either I missed or itself missed me,--
And I want and find you, Evelyn Hope!
  What is the issue? let us see!

I loved you, Evelyn, all the while;
  My heart seemed full as it could hold,--
There was place and to spare for the frank young smile,
  And the red young mouth, and the hair's young gold.
So, hush! I will give you this leaf to keep;
  See, I shut it inside the sweet, cold hand.
There, that is our secret! go to sleep;
  You will wake, and remember, and understand.

ROBERT BROWNING.



ANNABEL LEE.


It was many and many a year ago,
  In a kingdom by the sea,
That a maiden lived, whom you may know
  By the name of Annabel Lee;
And this maiden she lived with no other thought
  Than to love, and be loved by me.

I was a child and she was a child,
  In this kingdom by the sea;
But we loved with a love that was more than love,
  I and my Annabel Lee,--
With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
  Coveted her and me.

And this was the reason that long ago,
  In this kingdom by the sea,
A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
  My beautiful Annabel Lee;
So that her high-born kinsmen came,
  And bore her away from me,
To shut her up in a sepulchre,
  In this kingdom by the sea.

The angels, not so happy in heaven,
  Went envying her and me.
Yes! that was the reason (as all men know)
  In this kingdom by the sea,
That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
  Chilling and killing my Annabel Lee.

But our love it was stronger by far than the love
  Of those who were older than we,
  Of many far wiser than we;
And neither the angels in heayen above,
  Nor the demons down under the sea,
Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
  Of the beautiful Annabel Lee.

For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
  Of the beautiful Annabel Lee,
And the stars never rise but I feel the bright eyes
  Of the beautiful Annabel Lee.
And so, all the night-tide I lie down by the side

Of my darling, my darling, my life, and my bride,
  In her sepulchre there by the sea,
  In her tomb by the sounding sea.

EDGAR ALLAN FOE.



THY BRAES WERE BONNY.


Thy braes were bonny, Yarrow stream!
  When first on them I met my lover;
Thy braes how dreary, Yarrow stream!
  When now thy waves his body cover.

Forever now, O Yarrow stream!
  Thou art to me a stream of sorrow;
For never on thy banks shall I
  Behold my love, the flower of Yarrow.

He promised me a milk-white steed,
  To bear me to his father's bowers;
He promised me a little page,
  To 'squire me to his father's towers;
He promised me a wedding-ring,--
   The wedding-day was fixed to-morrow;
Now he is wedded to his grave,
   Alas, his watery grave, in Yarrow!

Sweet were his words when last we met;
   My passion I as freely told him!
Clasped in his arms, I little thought
   That I should nevermore behold him!
Scarce was he gone, I saw his ghost;
   It vanished with a shriek of sorrow;
Thrice did the water-wraith ascend,
   And gave a doleful groan through Yarrow.

His mother from the window looked
   With all the longing of a mother;
His little sister weeping walked
   The greenwood path to meet her brother.
They sought him east, they sought him west,
   They sought him all the forest thorough,
They only saw the cloud of night,
   They only heard the roar of Yarrow!

No longer from thy window look,
   Thou hast no son, thou tender mother!
No longer walk, thou lovely maid;
   Alas, thou hast no more a brother!
No longer seek him east or west,
   And search no more the forest thorough;
For, wandering in the night so dark,
   He fell a lifeless corse in Yarrow.

The tear shall never leave my cheek,
   No other youth shall be my marrow;
I'll seek thy body in the stream,
  And then with thee I'll sleep in Yarrow.

JOHN LOGAN.



FAREWELL TO THEE, ARABY'S DAUGHTER.

     FROM "THE FIRE-WORSHIPPERS."


Farewell,--farewell to thee, Araby's daughter!
  (Thus warbled a Peri beneath the dark sea;)
No pearl ever lay under Oman's green water
  More pure in its shell than thy spirit in thee.

O, fair as the sea-flower close to thee growing,
  How light was thy heart till love's witchery came,
Like the wind of the south o'er a summer lute blowing,
  And hushed all its music and withered its frame!

But long, upon Araby's green sunny highlands,
  Shall maids and their lovers remember the doom
Of her who lies sleeping among the Pearl Islands,
  With naught but the sea-star to light up her tomb.

And still, when the merry date-season is burning,
  And calls to the palm-grove the young and the old,
The happiest there, from their pastime returning
  At sunset, will weep when thy story is told.

The young village maid, when with flowers she dresses
  Her dark flowing-hair for some festival day,
Will think of thy fate till, neglecting her tresses,
  She mournfully turns from the mirror away.

Nor shall Iran, beloved of her hero, forget thee--
  Though tyrants watch over her tears as they start,
Close, close by the side of that hero she'll set thee,
  Embalmed in the innermost shrine of her heart.

Farewell!--be it ours to embellish thy pillow
  With everything beauteous that grows in the deep;
Each flower of the rock and each gem of the billow
  Shall sweeten thy bed and illumine thy sleep.

Around thee shall glisten the loveliest amber
  That ever the sorrowing sea-bird has wept;
With many a shell, in whose hollow-wreathed chamber,
  We, Peris of ocean, by moonlight have slept.

We'll dive where the gardens of coral lie darkling,
  And plant all the rosiest stems at thy head;
We'll seek where the sands of the Caspian are sparkling,
  And gather their gold to strew over thy bed.

Farewell!--farewell!--until pity's sweet fountain
  Is lost in the hearts of the fair and the brave,
They'll weep for the Chieftain who died on that mountain.
  They'll weep for the Maiden who sleeps in the wave.

THOMAS MOORE.



SOFTLY WOO AWAY HER BREATH.


Softly woo away her breath,
  Gentle death!
Let her leave thee with no strife,
  Tender, mournful, murmuring life!
She hath seen her happy day,--
  She hath had her bud and blossom;
Now she pales and shrinks away,
  Earth, into thy gentle bosom!

She hath done her bidding here,
  Angels dear!
Bear her perfect soul above.
  Seraph of the skies,--sweet love!
Good she was, and fair in youth;
  And her mind was seen to soar.
And her heart was wed to truth:
  Take her, then, forevermore,--
  Forever--evermore--

BRYAN WALLER PROCTER (_Barry Cornwall._)



SHE DIED IN BEAUTY.


She died in beauty,--like a rose
  Blown from its parent stem;
She died in beauty,--like a pearl
  Dropped from some diadem.

She died in beauty,--like a lay
  Along a moonlit lake;
She died in beauty,--like the song
  Of birds amid the brake.

She died in beauty,--like the snow
  On flowers dissolved away;
She died in beauty,--like a star
  Lost on the brow of day.

She lives in glory,--like night's gems
  Set round the silver moon;
She lives in glory,--like the sun
  Amid the blue of June.

CHARLES DOYNE SILLERY.



THE DEATH OF MINNEHAHA.

     FROM "THE SONG OF HIAWATHA."


All day long roved Hiawatha
In that melancholy forest,
Through the shadows of whose thickets,
In the pleasant days of Summer,
Of that ne'er forgotten Summer.
He had brought his young wife homeward
From the land of the Dacotahs;
When the birds sang in the thickets,
And the streamlets laughed and glistened,
And the air was full of fragrance,
And the lovely Laughing Water
Said with voice that did not tremble,
"I will follow you, my husband!"
  In the wigwam with Nokomis,
With those gloomy guests that watched her,
With the Famine and the Fever,
She was lying, the Beloved,
She, the dying Minnehaha.
  "Hark!" she said; "I hear a rushing,
Hear a roaring and a rushing,
Hear the Falls of Minnehaha
Calling to me from a distance!"
"No, my child!" said old Nokomis,
"'T is the night-wind in the pine-trees!"
  "Look!" she said; "I see my father
Standing lonely at his doorway.
Beckoning to me from his wigwam
In the land of the Dacotahs!"
"No, my child!" said old Nokomis,
"'T is the smoke, that waves and beckons!"
  "Ah!" said she, "the eyes of Panguk
Glare upon me in the darkness,
I can feel his icy fingers
Clasping mine amid the darkness!
Hiawatha! Hiawatha!"
  And the desolate Hiawatha,
Far away amid the forest,
Miles away among the mountains,
Heard that sudden cry of anguish,
Heard the voice of Minnehaha
Calling to him in the darkness,
"Hiawatha! Hiawatha!"
  Over snow-fields waste and pathless,
Under snow-encumbered branches,
Homeward hurried Hiawatha,
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,
Heard Nokomis moaning, wailing:
"Wahonowin! Wahonowin!
Would that I had perished for you,
Would that I were dead as you are!
Wahonowin! Wahonowin!"
  And he rushed into the wigwam,
Saw the old Nokomis slowly
Rocking to and fro and moaning,
Saw his lovely Minnehaha
Lying dead and cold before him,
And his bursting heart within him
Uttered such a cry of anguish,
That the forest moaned and shuddered,
That the very stars in heaven
Shook and trembled with his anguish.
  Then he sat down, still and speechless,
On the bed of Minnehaha,
At the feet of Laughing Water,
At those willing feet, that never
More would lightly run to meet him,
Never more would lightly follow.
  With both hands his face he covered,
Seven long days and nights he sat there,
As if in a swoon he sat there,
Speechless, motionless, unconscious
Of the daylight or the darkness.
   Then they buried Minnehaha;
In the snow a grave they made her,
In the forest deep and darksome,
Underneath the moaning hemlocks;
Clothed her in her richest garments,
Wrapped her in her robes of ermine,
Covered her with snow, like ermine;
Thus they buried Minnehaha.
   And at night a fire was lighted,
On her grave four times was kindled,
For her soul upon its journey
To the Islands of the Blessed.
From his doorway Hiawatha
Saw it burning in the forest,
Lighting up the gloomy hemlocks;
From his sleepless bed uprising,
From the bed of Minnehaha,
Stood and watched it at the doorway,
That it might not be extinguished,
Might not leave her in the darkness.
   "Farewell!" said he, "Minnehaha!
Farewell, O my Laughing Water!
All my heart is buried with you,
All my thoughts go onward with you,
Come not back again to labor,
Come not back again to suffer,
Where the Famine and the Fever
Wear the heart and waste the body.
Soon my task will be completed,
Soon your footsteps I shall follow
To the Islands of the Blessed,
To the Kingdom of Ponemah,
To the Land of the Hereafter!"

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



MOTHER AND POET.

    TURIN,--AFTER NEWS FROM GAETA, 1861.

    Laura Savio of Turin, a poetess and patriot, whose sons were
    killed at Ancona and Gaeta.


Dead! one of them shot by the sea in the east,
  And one of them shot in the west by the sea.
Dead! both my boys! When you sit at the feast,
  And are wanting a great song for Italy free,
    Let none look at me!

Yet I was a poetess only last year,
  And good at my art, for a woman, men said.
But this woman, this, who is agonized here,
  The east sea and west sea rhyme on in her head
    Forever instead.

What art can a woman be good at? O, vain!
  What art is she good at, but hurting her breast
With the milk teeth of babes, and a smile at the pain?
  Ah, boys, how you hurt! you were strong as you pressed,
    And I proud by that test.

What art's for a woman! To hold on her knees
  Both darlings! to feel all their arms round her throat
Cling, struggle a little! to sew by degrees
   And 'broider the long-clothes and neat little coat!
      To dream and to dote.

To teach them ... It stings there. I made them indeed
   Speak plain the word "country," I taught them, no doubt,
That a country's a thing men should die for at need.
   I prated of liberty, rights, and about
      The tyrant turned out.

And when their eyes flashed ... O my beautiful eyes! ...
   I exulted! nay, let them go forth at the wheels
Of the guns, and denied not.--But then the surprise,
   When one sits quite alone!--Then one weeps, then one kneels!
      --God! how the house feels!

At first happy news came, in gay letters moiled
   With my kisses, of camp-life and glory, and how
They both loved me, and soon, coming home to be spoiled,
   In return would fan off every fly from my brow
      With their green laurel-bough.

Then was triumph at Turin. "Ancona was free!"
   And some one came out of the cheers in the street
With a face pale as stone, to say something to me.
--My Guido was dead!--I fell down at his feet,
    While they cheered in the street.

I bore it;--friends soothed me: my grief looked sublime
  As the ransom of Italy. One boy remained
To be leant on and walked with, recalling the time
  When the first grew immortal, while both of us strained
    To the height he had gained.

And letters still came,--shorter, sadder, more strong,
  Writ now but in one hand. "I was not to faint.
One loved me for two ... would be with me ere-long:
  And 'Viva Italia' he died for, our saint,
    Who forbids our complaint."

My Nanni would add "he was safe, and aware
  Of a presence that turned off the balls ... was imprest
It was Guido himself, who knew what I could bear,
  And how 't was impossible, quite dispossessed,
    To live on for the rest."

On which without pause up the telegraph line
  Swept smoothly the next news from Gaeta:--"Shot.
Tell his mother." Ah, ah, "his," "their" mother; not "mine."
  No voice says "my mother" again to me. What!
    You think Guido forgot?

Are souls straight so happy that, dizzy with heaven,
  They drop earth's affections, conceive not of woe?
I think not. Themselves were too lately forgiven
  Through that love and sorrow which reconciled so
    The above and below.

O Christ of the seven wounds, who look'dst through the dark
  To the face of thy mother! consider, I pray.
How we common mothers stand desolate, mark,
  Whose sons, not being Christs, die with eyes turned away,
    And no last word to say!

Both boys dead! but that's out of nature. We all
  Have been patriots, yet each house must always keep one.
'T were imbecile hewing out roads to a wall.
  And when Italy's made, for what end is it done
    If we have not a son?

Ah, ah, ah! when Gaeta's taken, what then?
  When the fair wicked queen sits no more at her sport
Of the fire-balls of death crashing souls out of men?
   When your guns at Cavalli with final retort
      Have cut the game short,--

When Venice and Rome keep their new jubilee,
   When your flag takes all heaven for its white, green, and red,
When you have your country from mountain to sea,
   When King Victor has Italy's crown on his head,
      (And I have my dead,)

What then? Do not mock me. Ah, ring your bells low,
   And burn your lights faintly!--My country is there,
Above the star pricked by the last peak of snow,
   My Italy's there,--with my brave civic pair,
      To disfranchise despair.

Forgive me. Some women bear children in strength,
   And bite back the cry of their pain in self-scorn.
But the birth-pangs of nations will wring us at length
   Into such wail as this!--and we sit on forlorn
      When the man-child is born.

Dead! one of them shot by the sea in the west,
   And one of them shot in the east by the sea!
Both! both my boys!--If in keeping the feast
   You want a great song for your Italy free,
      Let none look at me!

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



FEAR NO MORE THE HEAT O' THE SUN.

     FROM "CYMBELINE," ACT IV, SC. 2.


Fear no more the heat o' the sun,
   Nor the furious winter's rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
   Home art gone, and ta'en thy wages:
Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.

Fear no more the frown o' the great,
   Thou art past the tyrant's stroke;
Care no more to clothe, and eat;
   To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this and come to dust.

Fear no more the lightning flash
   Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
   Thou hast finished joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers must
Consign to thee, and come to dust.

SHAKESPEARE.



HIGHLAND MARY.


Ye banks, and braes, and streams around
   The castle o' Montgomery,
Green be your woods, and fair your flowers,
   Your waters never drumlie!
There Simmer first unfald her robes
   And there she langest tarry!
For there I took the last fareweel
   O' my sweet Highland Mary.

How sweetly bloomed the gay green birk!
   How rich the hawthorn's blossom!
As underneath their fragrant shade
   I clasped her to my bosom!
The golden hours, on angel wings,
   Flew o'er me and my dearie;
For dear to me as light and life
   Was my sweet Highland Mary.

Wi' monie a vow and locked embrace
   Our parting was fu' tender;
And pledging aft to meet again,
   We tore ourselves asunder;
But, oh! fell death's untimely frost,
   That nipt my flower sae early!
Now green's the sod, and cauld's the clay,
   That wraps my Highland Mary!

Oh pale, pale now, those rosy lips
   I aft hae kissed sae fondly!
And closed for aye the sparkling glance
   That dwelt on me sae kindly!
And mould'ring now in silent dust
   That heart that lo'ed me dearly!
But still within my bosom's core
   Shall live my Highland Mary.

ROBERT BURNS.



FAIR HELEN.


I wish I were where Helen lies;
Night and day on me she cries;
O that I were where Helen lies
   On fair Kirconnell lea!

Curst be the heart that thought the thought,
And curst the hand that fired the shot,
When in my arms burd Helen dropt,
   And died to succor me!

O think na but my heart was sair
When my Love dropt down and spak nae mair!
I laid her down wi' meikle care
   On fair Kirconnell lea.

As I went down the water-side,
None but my foe to be my guide,
None but my foe to be my guide,
   On fair Kirconnell lea;

I lighted down my sword to draw,
I hacked him in pieces sma',
I hacked him in pieces sma',
   For her sake that died for me.

O Helen fair, beyond compare!
I'll make a garland of thy hair
Shall bind my heart for evermair
   Until the day I die.

O that I were where Helen lies!
Night and day on me she cries;
Out of my bed she bids me rise,
   Says, "Haste and come to me!"

O Helen fair! O Helen chaste!
If I were with thee, I were blest,
Where thou lies low and takes thy rest
   On fair Kirconnell lea.

I wish my grave were growing green,
A winding-sheet drawn ower my een,
And I in Helen's arms lying,
   On fair Kirconnell lea.

I wish I were where Helen lies;
Night and day on me she cries;
And I am weary of the skies,
   Since my Love died for me.

ANONYMOUS.



OH THAT 'T WERE POSSIBLE.

     FROM "MAUD."


Oh that 't were possible,
   After long grief and pain,
To find the arms of my true love
   Round me once again!

When I was wont to meet her
  In the silent woody places
Of the laud that gave me birth,
  We stood tranced in long embraces
Mixt with kisses sweeter, sweeter
  Than anything on earth.

A shadow flits before me,
  Not thou, but like to thee;
Ah Christ, that it were possible
  For one short hour to see
The souls we loved, that they might tell us
  What and where they be!

It leads me forth at evening,
  It lightly winds and steals
In a cold white robe before me,
  When all my spirit reels
At the shouts, the leagues of lights,
  And the roaring of the wheels.

Half the night I waste in sighs,
  Half in dreams I sorrow after
The delight of early skies;
  In a wakeful doze I sorrow
For the hand, the lips, the eyes--
  For the meeting of the morrow,
  The delight of happy laughter,
The delight of low replies.

'Tis a morning pure and sweet,
  And a dewy splendor falls
On the little flower that clings
  To the turrets and the walls;
'T is a morning pure and sweet,
And the light and shadow fleet:
   She is walking in the meadow,
And the woodland echo rings.
In a moment we shall meet;
   She is singing in the meadow,
And the rivulet at her feet
   Ripples on in light and shadow
To the ballad that she sings.

Do I hear her sing as of old,
   My bird with the shining head,
My own dove with the tender eye?
But there rings on a sudden a passionate cry--
   There is some one dying or dead;
And a sullen thunder is rolled;
   For a tumult shakes the city,
   And I wake--my dream is fled;
In the shuddering dawn, behold,
   Without knowledge, without pity,
   By the curtains of my bed
That abiding phantom cold!

Get thee hence, nor come again!
   Mix not memory with doubt,
Pass, thou deathlike type of pain,
   Pass and cease to move about!
'T is the blot upon the brain
That _will_ show itself without.

Then I rise; the eave-drops fall,
   And the yellow vapors choke
The great city sounding wide;
The day comes--a dull red ball
   Wrapt in drifts of lurid smoke
On the misty river-tide.

Through the hubbub of the market
   I steal, a wasted frame;
It crosses here, it crosses there,
Through all that crowd confused and loud
   The shadow still the same;
And on my heavy eyelids
   My anguish hangs like shame.

Alas for her that met me,
   That heard me softly call,
Came glimmering through the laurels
   At the quiet evenfall,
In the garden by the turrets
   Of the old manorial hall!

Would the happy spirit descend
   From the realms of light and song,
In the chamber or the street.
   As she looks among the blest,
Should I fear to greet my friend
   Or to say "Forgive the wrong,"
Or to ask her, "Take me, sweet,
   To the regions of thy rest?"

But the broad light glares and beats,
And the shadow flits and Meets
   And will not let me be;
And I loathe the squares and streets,
And the faces that one meets,
   Hearts with no love for me;
Always I long to creep
Into some still cavern deep,
There to weep, and weep, and weep
   My whole soul out to thee.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



TOO LATE.

     "Dowglas, Dowglas, tendir and treu."


Could ye come back to me, Douglas, Douglas,
   In the old likeness that I knew,
I would be so faithful, so loving, Douglas,
   Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.

Never a scornful word should grieve ye,
   I 'd smile on ye sweet as the angels do;
Sweet as your smile on me shone ever,
   Douglas, Douglas, tender and true.

Oh, to call back the days that are not!
   My eyes were blinded, your words were few:
Do you know the truth now, up in heaven,
   Douglas, Douglas, tender and true?

I never was worthy of you, Douglas;
   Not half worthy the like of you:
Now all men beside seem to me like shadows--
   I love you, Douglas, tender and true.

Stretch out your hand to me, Douglas, Douglas,
   Drop forgiveness from heaven like dew;
As I lay my heart on your dead heart, Douglas,
   Douglas, Douglas, tender and true!

DINAH MARIA MCLOCK CRAIK.



AFTER SUMMER.


We'll not weep for summer over,--
      No, not we:
Strew above his head the clover,--
      Let him be!

Other eyes may weep his dying,
      Shed their tears
There upon him, where he's lying
      With his peers.

Unto some of them he proffered
      Gifts most sweet;
For our hearts a grave he offered,--
      Was this meet?

All our fond hopes, praying, perished
      In his wrath,--
All the lovely dreams we cherished
      Strewed his path.

Shall we in our tombs, I wonder,
     Far apart,
Sundered wide as seas can sunder
      Heart from heart,

Dream at all of all the sorrows
      That were ours,--
Bitter nights, more bitter morrows;
      Poison-flowers

Summer gathered, as in madness,
      Saying, "See,
These are yours, in place of gladness,--
      Gifts from me"?

Nay, the rest that will be ours
      Is supreme,
And below the poppy flowers
      Steals no dream.

PHILIP BOURKE MARSTON.



LAMENT FOR HELIODORE.


Tears for my lady dead--
      Heliodore!
Salt tears, and strange to shed,
      Over and o'er;
Tears to my lady dead,
      Love do we send,
Longed for, remembered,
      Lover and friend!
Sad are the songs we sing,
      Tears that we shed,
Empty the gifts we bring
      Gifts to the dead!
Go, tears, and go, lament,
      Fare from her tomb,
Wend where my lady went
      Down through the gloom!
Ah, for my flower, my love,
      Hades hath taken I
Ah, for the dust above
      Scattered and shaken!
Mother of blade and grass,
      Earth, in thy breast
Lull her that gentlest was
      Gently to rest!

From the Greek of MELEAGER.
Translation of ANDREW LANG.



ON THE DEATH OF HER BROTHER, FRANCIS I.


'T is done! a father, mother, gone,
   A sister, brother, torn away,
My hope is now in God alone,
   Whom heaven and earth alike obey.
Above, beneath, to him is known,--
The world's wide compass is his own.

I love,--but in the world no more,
   Nor in gay hall, or festal bower;
Not the fair forms I prized before,--
   But him, all beauty, wisdom, power,
My Saviour, who has cast a chain
On sin and ill, and woe and pain!

I from my memory have effaced
   All former joys, all kindred, friends;
All honors that my station graced
   I hold but snares that fortune sends:
Hence! joys by Christ at distance cast,
That we may be his own at last!

From the French of MARGUERITE DE VALOIS, QUEEN OF NAVARRE.
Translation of LOUISA STUART COSTELLO.



TO MARY IN HEAVEN.

[Written in September, 1789, on the anniversary of the day on which he
heard of the death of his early love, Mary Campbell.]


Thou lingering star, with lessening ray,
   That lov'st to greet the early morn,
Again thou usher'st in the day
   My Mary from my soul was torn.
O Mary! dear departed shade!
   Where is thy place of blissful rest?
See'st thou thy lover lowly laid?
   Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?

That sacred hour can I forget,--
   Can I forget the hallowed grove,
Where by the winding Ayr we met
   To live one day of parting love?
Eternity will not efface
   Those records dear of transports past;
Thy image at our last embrace;
   Ah! little thought we 't was our last!

Ayr, gurgling, kissed his pebbled shore,
   O'erhung with wild woods, thickening green;
The fragrant birch, and hawthorn hoar,
   Twined amorous round the raptured scene;
The flowers sprang wanton to be prest,
   The birds sang love on every spray,--
Till soon, too soon, the glowing west
   Proclaimed the speed of winged day.

Still o'er these scenes my memory wakes,
   And fondly broods with miser care!
Time but the impression stronger makes,
   As streams their channels deeper wear.
My Mary! dear departed shade!
   Where is thy place of blissful rest?
See'st thou thy lover lowly laid?
   Hear'st thou the groans that rend his breast?

ROBERT BURNS.



MINSTREL'S SONG.


O sing unto my roundelay!
  O, drop the briny tear with me!
Dance no more at holiday;
  Like a running river be.
    _My love is dead,
    Gone to his death-bed,
    All under the willow-tree._

Black his hair as the winter night,
  White his neck as the summer snow,
Ruddy his face as the morning light;
  Cold he lies in the grave below.
    _My love is dead_, etc.

Sweet his tongue as the throstle's note;
  Quick in dance as thought can be;
Deft his tabor, cudgel stout;
  O, lie lies by the willow-tree!
    _My love is dead_, etc.

Hark! the raven flaps his wing
  In the briered dell below;
Hark! the death-owl loud doth sing
  To the nightmares as they go.
    _My love is dead_, etc.

See! the white moon shines on high;
  Whiter is my-true-love's shroud,
Whiter than the morning sky,
  Whiter than the evening cloud.
    _My love is dead_, etc.

Here, upon my true-love's grave
  Shall the barren flowers be laid,
Nor one holy saint to save
  All the coldness of a maid.
    _My love is dead_, etc.

With my hands I'll bind the briers
  Round his holy corse to gre;
Ouphant fairy, light your fires;
  Here my body still shall be.
    _My love is dead_, etc.

Come, with acorn-cup and thorn,
  Drain my heart's blood away;
Life and all its good I scorn,
  Dance by night, or feast by day.
    _My love is dead_, etc.

Water-witches, crowned with reytes,
  Bear me to your lethal tide.
I die! I come! my true-love waits....
  Thus the damsel spake, and died.

THOMAS CHATTERTON.



THE PASSAGE.


Many a year is in its grave
Since I crossed this restless wave:
And the evening, fair as ever.
Shines on ruin, rock, and river.

Then in this same boat beside.
Sat two comrades old and tried,--
One with all a father's truth,
One with all the fire of youth.

One on earth in silence wrought,
And his grave in silence sought;
But the younger, brighter form
Passed in battle and in storm.

So, whene'er I turn mine eye
Back upon the days gone by,
Saddening thoughts of friends come o'er me,
Friends that closed their course before me.

But what binds us, friend to friend,
But that soul with soul can blend?
Soul-like were those hours of yore;
Let us walk in soul once more.

Take, O boatman, thrice thy fee,
Take, I give it willingly;
For, invisible to thee,
Spirits twain have crossed with me.

From the German of LUDWIG UHLAND.
Translation of SARAH TAYLOR AUSTIN.



LAMENT OF THE IRISH EMIGRANT.


I'm sittin' on the stile, Mary,
  Where we sat side by side
On a bright May mornin' long ago,
  When first you were my bride;
The corn was springin' fresh and green.
  And the lark sang loud and high--
And the red was on your lip, Mary,
  And the love-light in your eye.

The place is little changed, Mary;
  The day is bright as then;
The lark's loud song is in my ear,
  And the corn is green again;
But I miss the soft clasp of your hand,
  And your breath, warm on my cheek;
And I still keep list'nin' for the words
  You nevermore will speak.

'Tis but a step down yonder lane,
  And the little church stands near--
The church where we were wed, Mary;
  I see the spire from here.
But the graveyard lies between, Mary,
  And my step might break your rest--
For I've laid you, darling! down to sleep,
  With your baby on your breast.

I'm very lonely now, Mary.
  For the poor make no new friends:
But, oh, they love the better still
  The few our Father sends!
And you were all I had, Mary--
  My blessin' and my pride!
There's nothing left to care for now,
  Since my poor Mary died.

Yours was the good, brave heart, Mary,
  That still kept hoping on.
When the trust in God had left my soul,
  And my arm's young strength was gone;
There was comfort ever on your lip,
  And the kind look on your brow,--
I bless you, Mary, for that same,
  Though you cannot hear me now.

I thank you for the patient smile
  When your heart was fit to break,--
When the hunger-pain was gnawin' there,
  And you hid it for my sake;
I bless you for the pleasant word,
  When your heart was sad and sore,--
O, I'm thankful you are gone, Mary,
  Where grief can't reach you more!

I'm biddin' you a long farewell,
  My Mary--kind and true!
But I'll not forget you, darling,
  In the land I'm goin' to;
They say there's bread and work for all,
  And the sun shines always there--
But I'll not forget old Ireland,
  Were it fifty times as fair!

And often in those grand old woods
  I'll sit, and shut my eyes,
And my heart will travel back again
  To the place where Mary lies;
And I'll think I see the little stile
  Where we sat side by side,
And the springin' corn, and the bright May morn,
  When first you were my bride.

LADY DUFFERIN.



HOME THEY BROUGHT HER WARRIOR DEAD.

     FROM "THE PRINCESS."


Home they brought her warrior dead:
  She nor swooned, nor uttered cry;
All her maidens, watching, said,
  "She must weep or she will die."

Then they praised him, soft and low,
  Called him worthy to be loved,
Truest friend and noblest foe;
  Yet she neither spoke nor moved.

Stole a maiden from her place,
  Lightly to the warrior stept,
Took the face-cloth from the face;
  Yet she neither moved nor wept.

Rose a nurse of ninety years,
  Set his child upon her knee,--
Like summer tempest came her tears,
  "Sweet my child, I live for thee."

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



THE KING OF DENMARK'S RIDE.


Word was brought to the Danish king
  (Hurry!)
That the love of his heart lay suffering,
And pined for the comfort his voice would bring;
  (O, ride as though you were flying!)
Better he loves each golden curl
On the brow of that Scandinavian girl
Than his rich crown jewels of ruby and pearl:
  And his rose of the isles is dying!

Thirty nobles saddled with speed;
  (Hurry!)
Each one mounting a gallant steed
Which he kept for battle and days of need;
  (O, ride as though you were flying!)
Spurs were struck in the foaming flank;
Worn out chargers staggered and sank;
Bridles were slackened, and girths were burst;
But ride as they would, the king rode first,
  For his rose of the isles lay dying!

His nobles are beaten, one by one;
  (Hurry!)
They have fainted, and faltered, and homeward gone;
His little fair page now follows alone,
  For strength and for courage trying!
The king looked back at that faithful child;
Wan was the face that answering smiled;
They passed the drawbridge with clattering din,
Then he dropped; and only the king rode in
  Where his rose of the isles lay dying!

The king blew a blast on his bugle horn;
  (Silence!)
No answer came; but faint and forlorn
An echo returned on the cold gray morn,
  Like the breath of a spirit sighing.
The castle portal stood grimly wide;
None welcomed the king from that weary ride;
For dead, in the light of the dawning day,
The pale sweet form of the welcomer lay,
  Who had yearned for his voice while dying!

The panting steed, with a drooping crest,
  Stood weary.
The king returned from her chamber of rest,
The thick sobs choking in his breast;
  And, that dumb companion eyeing,
The tears gushed forth which he strove to check;
He bowed his head on his charger's neck:
"O steed, that every nerve didst strain,
Dear steed, our ride hath been in vain
  To the halls where my love lay dying!"

CAROLINE E.S. NORTON.



GRIEF.

     FROM "HAMLET," ACT I. SC. 2.


  QUEEN.--Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted color off,
And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark.
Do not, forever, with thy veiled lids
Seek for thy noble father in the dust:
Thou know'st 'tis common,--all that live must die,
Passing through nature to eternity.

  HAMLET.--Ay, madam, it is common.

  QUEEN.--If it be,
Why seems it so particular with thee?

  HAMLET.--Seems, madam! nay, it is; I know not seems.
'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,
Nor customary suits of solemn black,
Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,
No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,
Nor the dejected havior of the visage,
Together with all forms, modes, shows of grief,
That can denote me truly: these, indeed, seem,
For they are actions that a man might play:
But I have that within, which passeth show;
These, but the trappings and the suits of woe.

SHAKESPEARE.



SELECTIONS FROM "IN MEMORIAM."

[ARTHUR HENRY HALLAM, OB. 1833.]


GRIEF UNSPEAKABLE.


V.

I sometimes hold it half a sin
  To put in words the grief I feel:
  For words, like Nature, half reveal
And half conceal the Soul within.

But, for the unquiet heart and brain,
  A use in measured language lies;
  The sad mechanic exercise,
Like dull narcotics, numbing pain.

In words, like weeds, I'll wrap me o'er,
  Like coarsest clothes against the cold;
  But that large grief which these enfold
Is given in outline and no more.


DEAD, IN A FOREIGN LAND.


IX.

Fair ship, that from the Italian shore
  Sailest the placid ocean-plains
  With my lost Arthur's loved remains,
Spread thy full wings, and waft him o'er.

So draw him home to those that mourn
  In vain; a favorable speed
  Ruffle thy mirrored mast, and lead
Through prosperous floods his holy urn.
All night no ruder air perplex
  Thy sliding keel, till Phosphor, bright
  As our pure love, through early light
Shall glimmer on the dewy decks.

Sphere all your lights around, above;
  Sleep, gentle heavens, before the prow;
  Sleep, gentle winds, as he sleeps now,
My friend, the brother of my love;

My Arthur, whom I shall not see
  Till all my widowed race be run;
  Dear as the mother to the son,
More than my brothers are to me.


THE PEACE OF SORROW


XI.

Calm is the morn without a sound,
  Calm as to suit a calmer grief,
  And only through the faded leaf
The chestnut pattering to the ground:

Calm and deep peace on this high wold
  And on these dews that drench the furze,
  And all the silvery gossamers
That twinkle into green and gold:

Calm and still light on yon great plain
  That sweeps with all its autumn bowers,
  And crowded farms, and lessening towers,
To mingle with the bounding main:

Calm and deep peace in this wide air,
  These leaves that redden to the fall;
  And in my heart, if calm at all,
If any calm, a calm despair:

Calm on the seas, and silver sleep,
  And waves that sway themselves in rest,
  And dead calm in that noble breast
Which heaves but with the heaving deep.


TIME AND ETERNITY.


XLII.

If Sleep and Death be truly one,
  And every spirit's folded bloom
  Through all its intervital gloom
In some long trance should slumber on;

Unconscious of the sliding hour,
  Bare of the body, might it last,
  And silent traces of the past
Be all the color of the flower:

So then were nothing lost to man;
  So that still garden of the souls
  In many a figured leaf enrolls
The total world since life began;

And love will last as pure and whole
  As when he loved me here in Time,
  And at the spiritual prime
Rewaken with the dawning soul.


PERSONAL RESURRECTION.


XLVI.

That each, who seems a separate whole,
  Should move his rounds, and fusing all
  The skirts of self again, should fall
Remerging in the general Soul,

Is faith as vague as all unsweet:
  Eternal form shall still divide
  The eternal soul from all beside;
And I shall know him when we meet:

And we shall sit at endless feast,
  Enjoying each the other's good:
  What vaster dream can hit the mood
Of Love on earth? He seeks at least

Upon the last and sharpest height,
  Before the spirits fade away,
  Some landing-place to clasp and say,
"Farewell! We lose ourselves in light."


SPIRITUAL COMPANIONSHIP.


XCIII.

How pure at heart and sound in head,
  With what divine affections bold,
  Should be the man whose thought would hold
An hour's communion with the dead.

In vain shalt thou, or any, call
  The spirits from their golden day,
Except, like them, thou too canst say,
My spirit is at peace with all.

They haunt the silence of the breast,
  Imaginations calm and fair,
  The memory like a cloudless air,
The conscience as a sea at rest:

But when the heart is full of din,
  And doubt beside the portal waits,
  They can but listen at the gates,
And hear the household jar within.


L.

Do we indeed desire the dead
  Should still be near us at our side?
  Is there no baseness we would hide?
No inner vileness that we dread?

Shall he for whose applause I strove,
  I had such reverence for his blame,
  See with clear eye some hidden shame,
And I be lessened in his love?

I wrong the grave with fears untrue:
  Shall love be blamed for want of faith?
  There must be wisdom with great Death:
The dead shall look me through and through.

Be near us when we climb or fall:
  Ye watch, like God, the rolling hours
  With larger other eyes than ours,
To make allowance for us all.


DEATH IN LIFE'S PRIME.


LXXII.

So many worlds, so much to do,
  So little done, such things to be,
  How know I what had need of thee?
For thou wert strong as thou wert true.

The fame is quenched that I foresaw,
  The head hath missed an earthly wreath:
  I curse not nature, no, nor death;
For nothing is that errs from law.

We pass; the path that each man trod
  Is dim, or will be dim, with weeds:
  What fame is left for human deeds
In endless age? It rests with God.

O hollow wraith of dying fame,
  Fade wholly, while the soul exults,
  And self-enfolds the large results
Of force that would have forged a name.


THE POET'S TRIBUTE.


LXXVI.

What hope is here for modern rhyme
  To him who turns a musing eye
  On songs, and deeds, and lives, that lie
Foreshortened in the tract of time?

These mortal lullabies of pain
  May bind a book, may line a box,
  May serve to curl a maiden's locks:
Or when a thousand moons shall wane
A man upon a stall may find,
  And, passing, turn the page that tells.
  A grief, then changed to something else,
Sung by a long-forgotten mind.

But what of that? My darkened ways
  Shall ring with music all the same;
  To breathe my loss is more than fame,
To utter love more sweet than praise.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



APRES.


Down, down, Ellen, my little one,
Climbing so tenderly up to my knee;
Why should you add to the thoughts that are taunting me,
Dreams of your mother's arms clinging to me?

Cease, cease, Ellen, my little one,
Warbling so fairily close to my ear;
Why should you choose, of all songs that are haunting me,
This that I made for your mother to hear?

Hush, hush, Ellen, my little one,
Wailing so wearily under the stars;
Why should I think of her tears, that might light to me
Love that had made life, and sorrow that mars?

Sleep, sleep, Ellen, my little one!
Is she not like her whenever she stirs?
Has she not eyes that will soon be as bright to me,
Lips that will some day be honeyed like hers?

Yes, yes, Ellen, my little one.
Though her white bosom is stilled in the grave,
Something more white than her bosom is spared to me,--
Something to cling to and something to crave.

Love, love, Ellen, my little one!
Love indestructible, love undefiled,
Love through all deeps of her spirit lies bared to me,
Oft as I look on the face of her child.

ARTHUR JOSEPH MUNBY.



THE FAIREST THING IN MORTAL EYES.

     Addressed to his deceased wife, who died in childbed at the
     age of twenty-two.


To make my lady's obsequies
  My love a minster wrought,
And, in the chantry, service there
  Was sung by doleful thought;
The tapers were of burning sighs,
  That light and odor gave:
And sorrows, painted o'er with tears,
  Enlumined her grave;
And round about, in quaintest guise,
Was carved: "Within this tomb there lies
The fairest thing in mortal eyes."
Above her lieth spread a tomb
  Of gold and sapphires blue:
The gold doth show her blessedness,
  The sapphires mark her true;
For blessedness and truth in her
  Were livelily portrayed,
When gracious God with both his hands
  Her goodly substance made.
He framed her in such wondrous wise,
She was, to speak without disguise,
The fairest thing in mortal eyes.

No more, no more! my heart doth faint
  When I the life recall
Of her who lived so free from taint,
  So virtuous deemed by all,--
  That in herself was so complete
  I think that she was ta'en
By God to deck his paradise,
  And with his saints to reign,
Whom while on earth each one did prize
The fairest thing in mortal eyes.

But naught our tears avail, or cries;
  All soon or late in death shall sleep;
  Nor living wight long time may keep
The fairest thing in mortal eyes.

From the French of CHARLES, DUKE OF ORLEANS.
Translation of HENRY FRANCIS CARY.



BREAK, BREAK, BREAK.


Break, break, break,
  On thy cold gray stones, O sea!
And I would that my tongue could utter
  The thoughts that arise in me.

O well for the fisherman's boy
  That he shouts with his sister at play!
O well for the sailor lad
  That he sings in his boat on the bay!

And the stately ships go on,
  To the haven under the hill;
But O for the touch of a vanished hand,
  And the sound of a voice that is still!

Break, break, break,
  At the foot of thy crags, O sea!
But the tender grace of a day that is dead
  Will never come back to me.

ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON.



LAVENDER.


How prone we are to hide and hoard
Each little treasure time has stored,
  To tell of happy hours!
We lay aside with tender care
A tattered book, a lock of hair,
  A bunch of faded flowers.

When death has led with silent hand
Our darlings to the "Silent Land,"
  Awhile we sit bereft;
But time goes on; anon we rise,
Our dead are buried from our eyes,
  We gather what is left.

The books they loved, the songs they sang,
The little flute whose music rang
  So cheerily of old;
The pictures we had watched them paint,
The last plucked flower, with odor faint,
  That fell from fingers cold.

We smooth and fold with reverent care
The robes they living used to wear;
  And painful pulses stir
As o'er the relics of our dead,
With bitter rain of tears, we spread
  Pale purple lavender.

And when we come in after years,
With only tender April tears
  On cheeks once white with care,
To look on treasures put away
Despairing on that far-off day,
  A subtile scent is there.

Dew-wet and fresh we gather them,
These fragrant flowers; now every stem
  Is bare of all its bloom:
Tear-wet and sweet we strewed them here
To lend our relics, sacred, dear,
  Their beautiful perfume.

The scent abides on book and lute,
On curl and flower, and with its mute
  But eloquent appeal
  It wins from us a deeper sob
For our lost dead, a sharper throb
Than we are wont to feel.

It whispers of the "long ago;"
Its love, its loss, its aching woe,
  And buried sorrows stir;
And tears like those we shed of old
Roll down our cheeks as we behold
  Our faded lavender.

ANONYMOUS.



WHAT OF THE DARKNESS?

     TO THE HAPPY DEAD PEOPLE.


What of the darkness? Is it very fair?
Are there great calms? and find we silence there?
Like soft-shut lilies, all your faces glow
With some strange peace our faces never know,
With some strange faith our faces never dare,--
Dwells it in Darkness? Do you find it there?

Is it a Bosom where tired heads may lie?
Is it a Mouth to kiss our weeping dry?
Is it a Hand to still the pulse's leap?
Is it a Voice that holds the runes of sleep?
Day shows us not such comfort anywhere--
Dwells it in Darkness? Do ye find it there?

Out of the Day's deceiving light we call--
Day that shows man so great, and God so small,
That hides the stars, and magnifies the grass--
O is the Darkness too a lying glass!
Or undistracted, do you find truth there?
What of the Darkness? Is it very fair?

RICHARD LE GALLIENNE.



VAN ELSEN.


God spake three times and saved Van Elsen's soul;
He spake by sickness first and made him whole;
  Van Elsen heard him not,
  Or soon forgot.

God spake to him by wealth, the world outpoured
Its treasures at his feet, and called him Lord;
  Van Elsen's heart grew fat
  And proud thereat.

God spake the third time when the great world smiled,
And in the sunshine slew his little child;
  Van Elsen like a tree
  Fell hopelessly.

Then in the darkness came a voice which said,
"As thy heart bleedeth, so my heart hath bled,
  As I have need of thee,
  Thou needest me."

That night Van Elsen kissed the baby feet,
And, kneeling by the narrow winding sheet,
  Praised Him with fervent breath
  Who conquered death.

FREDERICK GEORGE SCOTT.




WHEN LILACS LAST IN THE DOOR-YARD BLOOMED.

     [THE DEATH OF LINCOLN.]


1.

When lilacs last in the door-yard bloomed,
And the great star early drooped in the western sky in the night,
I mourned and yet shall mourn with ever-returning spring.

Ever-returning spring, trinity sure to me you bring,
Lilacs blooming perennial, and drooping star in the west,
And thought of him I love.


2.

O powerful western fallen star!
O shades of night--O moody, tearful night!
O great star disappeared--O the black murk that hides the star!
O cruel hands that hold me powerless--O helpless soul of me!
O harsh surrounding cloud that will not free my soul!


3.

In the door-yard fronting an old farm-house, near the whitewashed
          palings,
Stands the lilac-bush tall-growing with heart-shaped leaves of rich
          green,
With many a pointed blossom rising delicate, with the perfume strong I
          love,
With every leaf a miracle;--and from this bush in the door-yard,
With delicate-colored blossoms and heart-shaped leaves of rich green,
A sprig with its flower I break.


4.

In the swamp in secluded recesses,
A shy and hidden bird is warbling a song.

Solitary the thrush,
The hermit withdrawn to himself, avoiding the settlements,
Sings by himself a song.--

Song of the bleeding throat,
Death's outlet song of life (for well, dear brother, I know,
If thou wast not granted to sing thou wouldst surely die).


5.

Over the breast of the spring, the land, amid cities,
Amid lanes and through old woods, where lately the violets peeped from
          the ground, spotting the gray debris,
Amid the grass in the fields each side of the lanes, passing the endless
          grass,
Passing the yellow-speared wheat, every grain from its shroud in the
          dark-brown fields up-risen,
Passing the apple-tree blows of white and pink in the orchards,
Carrying a corpse to where it shall rest in the grave,
Night and day journeys a coffin.


6.

Coffin that passes through lanes and streets,
Through day and night with the great cloud darkening the land,
With the pomp of the inlooped flags, with the cities draped in black,
With the show of the States themselves as of crape-veiled women standing,
With processions long and winding and the flambeaus of the night,
With the countless torches lit, with the silent sea of faces and the
          unbared heads,
With the waiting depot, the arriving coffin, and the sombre faces,
With dirges through the night, with the thousand voices rising strong
          and solemn,
With all the mournful voices of the dirges poured around the coffin,
The dim-lit churches and the shuddering organs--where amid these you
          journey,
With the tolling, tolling bells' perpetual clang,
Here, coffin that slowly passes,
I give you my sprig of lilac.


7.

(Nor for you, for one alone,--
Blossoms and branches green to coffins all I bring;
For, fresh as the morning, thus would I chant a song for you, O sane and
          sacred death.
All over bouquets of roses,
O death, I cover you over with roses and early lilies,
But mostly and now the lilac that blooms the first,
Copious I break, I break the sprigs from the bushes,
With loaded arms I come, pouring for you,
For you and the coffins all of you, O death.)


8.

O western orb sailing the heaven,
Now I know what you must have meant as a month since I walked,
As I walked in silence the transparent shadowy night,
As I saw you had something to tell as you bent to me night after night,
As you drooped from the sky low down as if to my side (while the other
          stars all looked on),
As we wandered together the solemn night (for something, I know not
          what, kept me from sleep),
As the night advanced, and I saw on the rim of the west how full you
          were of woe,
As I stood on the rising ground in the breeze in the cool transparent
          night,
As I watched where you passed and was lost in the netherward black of
          the night,
As my soul in its trouble dissatisfied sank, as where you, sad orb.
Concluded, dropt in the night, and was gone.


9.

Sing on there in the swamp,
O singer bashful and tender! I hear your notes, I hear your call,
I hear, I come presently, I understand you;
But a moment I linger, for the lustrous star has detained me,
The star my departing comrade holds and detains me.


10.

O how shall I warble myself for the dead one there I loved?
And how shall I deck my song for the large sweet soul that has gone?
And what shall my perfume be for the grave of him I love?

Sea-winds blown from east and west,
Blown from the Eastern sea and blown from the Western sea, till there on
          the prairies meeting,
These and with these and the breath of my chant,
I'll perfume the grave of him I love.


11.

O what shall I hang on the chamber walls?
And what shall the pictures be that I hang on the walls,
To adorn the burial-house of him I love?
Pictures of growing spring and farms and homes,
With the Fourth-month eve at sundown, and the gray smoke lucid and bright,
With floods of the yellow gold of the gorgeous, indolent, sinking sun,
          burning, expanding the air,
With the fresh sweet herbage under foot, and the pale green leaves of
          the trees prolific,
In the distance the flowing glaze, the breast of the river, with a
          wind-dapple here and there,
With ranging hills on the banks, with many a line against the sky, and
          shadows,
And the city at hand with dwellings so dense, and stacks of chimneys,
And all the scenes of life and the workshops, and the workmen homeward
          returning.


12.

Lo, body and soul--this land,
My own Manhattan with spires, and the sparkling and hurrying tides, and
          the ships,
The varied and ample land, the South and the North in the light, Ohio's
          shores and flashing Missouri,
And ever the far-spreading prairies covered with grass and corn.
Lo, the most excellent sun so calm and haughty,
The violet and purple morn with just-felt breezes,
The gentle soft-born measureless light,
The miracle spreading, bathing all, the fulfilled noon,
The coming eve delicious, the welcome night and the stars,
Over my cities shining all, enveloping man and land.


13.

Sing on, sing on, you gray-brown bird!
Sing from the swamps, the recesses; pour your chant from the bushes,
Limitless out of the dusk, out of the cedars and pines.

Sing on, dearest brother, warble your reedy song,
Loud human song, with voice of uttermost woe.

O liquid and free and tender!
O wild and loose to my soul--O wondrous singer!
You only I hear--yet the star holds me (but will soon depart),
Yet the lilac with mastering odor holds me.


14.

Now while I sat in the day and looked forth,
In the close of the day with its light and the fields of spring, and the
          farmers preparing their crops,
In the large unconscious scenery of my land with its lakes and forests.
In the heavenly aerial beauty (after the perturbed winds and the storms),
Under the arching heavens of the afternoon swift passing, and the voices
          of children and women,
The many-moving sea-tides, and I saw the ships how they sailed,
And the summer approaching with richness, and the fields all busy with
          labor,
And the infinite separate houses, how they all went on, each with its
          meals and minutia of daily usages,
And the streets how their throbbings throbbed, and the cities pent--lo,
         then and there,
Falling upon them all and among them all, enveloping me with the rest,
Appeared the cloud, appeared the long black trail,
And I knew death, its thought, and the sacred knowledge of death.

Then with the knowledge of death as walking one side of me,
And the thought of death close-walking the other side of me,
And I in the middle as with companions, and as holding the hands of
          companions,
I fled forth to the hiding receiving night that talks not,
Down to the shores of the water, the path by the swamp in the dimness,
To the solemn shadowy cedars and ghostly pines so still.

And the singer so shy to the rest received me,
The gray-brown bird I know received us comrades three,
And he sang the carol of death, and a verse for him I love.

From deep secluded recesses,
From the fragrant cedars and the ghostly pines so still,
Came the carol of the bird.

And the charm of the carol rapt me,
As I held as if by their hands my comrades in the night,
And the voice of my spirit tallied the song of the bird.

_Come, lovely and soothing death.
Undulate round the world, serenely arriving, arriving,
In the, day, in the night, to all, to each,
Sooner or later, delicate death_.

_Praised be the fathomless universe,
For life and joy, and for objects and knowledge curious,
And for love, sweet love--but praise! praise! praise!
For the sure-enwinding arms of cool-enfolding death_.

_Dark mother, always gliding near with soft feet,
Have none chanted for thee a chant of fullest welcome?
Then I chant it for thee, I glorify thee above all,
I bring thee a song that when thou must indeed come, come unfalteringly._

_Approach, strong deliveress!
When it is so, when thou, hast taken them, I joyously sing the dead,
Lost in the loving floating ocean of thee,
Laved in the flood of thy bliss, O death_.

_From me to thee glad serenades,
Dances for thee, I propose, saluting thee, adornments and feastings for
          thee;
And the sights of the open landscape and the high-spread sky are fitting,
And life and the fields, and the huge and thoughtful night--_

_The night in silence under many a star,
The ocean shore and the husky whispering wave whose voice I know,
And the soul turning to thee, O vast and well-veiled death,
And the body gratefully nestling close to thee_.

_Over the tree-tops I float thee a song,
Over the rising and sinking waves, over the myriad fields and the
          prairies wide,
Over the dense-packed cities all and the teeming wharves and ways,
I float this carol with joy, with joy to thee, O death_.


15.

To the tally of my soul,
Loud and strong kept up the gray-brown bird,
With pure deliberate notes spreading, filling the night,

Loud in the pines and cedars dim.
Clear in the freshness moist and the swamp-perfume,
And I with my comrades there in the night.

While my sight that was bound in my eyes unclosed,
As to long panoramas of visions.

And I saw askant the armies,
I saw as in noiseless dreams hundreds of battle-flags,
Borne through the smoke of the battles and pierced with missiles I saw
          them,
And carried hither and yon through the smoke, and torn and bloody.
And at last but a few shreds left on the staffs (and all in silence),
And the staffs all splintered and broken.

I saw battle-corpses, myriads of them,
And the white skeletons of young men, I saw them;
I saw the debris and debris of all the slain soldiers of the war,
But I saw they were not as was thought,
They themselves were fully at rest, they suffered not:
The living remained and suffered, the mother suffered,
And the wife and the child and the musing comrade suffered,
And the armies that remained suffered.


16.

Passing the visions, passing the night,
Passing, unloosing the hold of my comrades' hands,
Passing the song of the hermit bird and the tallying song of my soul,
Victorious song, death's outlet song, yet varying ever-altering song,
As low and wailing, yet clear the notes, rising and falling, flooding
          the night,
Sadly sinking and fainting, as warning and warning, and yet again bursting
          with joy,
Covering the earth and filling the spread of the heaven,
As that powerful psalm in the night I heard from recesses,
Passing, I leave thee lilac with heart-shaped leaves,
I leave thee there in the door-yard, blooming, returning with spring.

I cease from my song for thee,
From my gaze on thee in the west, fronting the west, communing with thee,
O comrade lustrous, with silver face in the night.
Yet each to keep and all, retrievements out of the night,
The song, the wondrous chant of the gray brown bird,
And the tallying chant, the echo aroused in my soul,
With the lustrous and drooping star with the countenance full of woe.
With the holders holding my hand nearing the call of the bird,
Comrades mine and I in the midst, and their memory ever to keep, for the
          dead I loved so well.
For the sweetest, wisest soul of all my days and lands--and this for his
          dear sake,
Lilac and star and bird twined with the chant of my soul,
There in the fragrant pines and the cedars dusk and dim.

WALT WHITMAN.



IF I SHOULD DIE TO-NIGHT.


    If I should die to-night,
My friends would look upon my quiet face
Before they laid it in its resting-place,
And deem that death had left it almost fair;
And, laying snow-white flowers against my hair.
Would smooth it down with tearful tenderness,
And fold my hands with lingering caress--
Poor hands, so empty and so cold to-night!

    If I should die to-night,
My friends would call to mind, with loving thought,
Some kindly deed the icy hands had wrought;
Some gentle word the frozen lips had said;
Errands on which the willing feet had sped;
The memory of my selfishness and pride,
My hasty words, would all be put aside,
And so I should be loved and mourned to-night.

    If I should die to-night,
Even hearts estranged would turn once more to me,
Recalling other days remorsefully;
The eyes that chill me with averted glance
Would look upon me as of yore, perchance,
And soften, in the old familiar way;
For who could war with dumb, unconscious clay?
So I might rest, forgiven of all, to-night.

    Oh, friends, I pray to-night,
Keep not your kisses for my dead, cold brow--
The way is lonely; let me feel them now.
Think gently of me; I am travel-worn;
My faltering feet are pierced with many a thorn.
Forgive, oh, hearts estranged, forgive, I plead!
When dreamless rest is mine I shall not need
The tenderness for which I long to-night.

BELLE E. SMITH.



AWAKENING.


Down to the borders of the silent land
  He goes with halting feet;
He dares not trust; he cannot understand
  The blessedness complete
That waits for God's beloved at his right hand.

He dreads to see God's face, for though the pure
  Beholding him are blest,
Yet in his sight no evil can endure;
  And still with fear oppressed
He looks within and cries, "Who can be sure?"

The world beyond is strange; the golden streets,
  The palaces so fair,
The seraphs singing in the shining seats,
  The glory everywhere,--
And to his soul he solemnly repeats

The visions of the Book. "Alas!" he cries,
  "That world is all too grand;
Among those splendors and those majesties
  I would not dare to stand;
For me a lowlier heaven would well suffice!"

Yet, faithful in his lot this saint has stood
  Through service and through pain;
The Lord Christ he has followed, doing good;
  Sure, dying must be gain
To one who living hath done what he could.

The light is fading in the tired eyes,
  The weary race is run;
Not as the victor that doth seize the prize.
  But as the fainting one,
He nears the verge of the eternities.

And now the end has come, and now he sees
  The happy, happy shore;
O fearful, and faint, distrustful soul, are these
  The things thou fearedst before--
The awful majesties that spoiled thy peace?

This land is home; no stranger art thou here;
  Sweet and familiar words
From voices silent long salute thine ear;
  And winds and songs of birds,
And bees and blooms and sweet perfumes are near.

The seraphs--they are men of kindly mien;
  The gems and robes--but signs
Of minds all radiant and of hearts washed clean;
  The glory--such as shines
Wherever faith or hope or love is seen.

And he, O doubting child! the Lord of grace
  Whom thou didst fear to see--
He knows thy sin--but look upon his face!
  Doth it not shine on thee
With a great light of love that fills the place?

O happy soul, be thankful now and rest!
  Heaven is a goodly land;
And God is love; and those he loves are blest;--
  Now thou dost understand;
The least thou hast is better than the best

That thou didst hope for; now upon thine eyes
  The new life opens fair;
Before thy feet the Blessed journey lies
  Through homelands everywhere;
And heaven to thee is all a sweet surprise.

WASHINGTON GLADDEN.



BEYOND THE SMILING AND THE WEEPING.


Beyond the smiling and the weeping
      I shall be soon;
Beyond the waking and the sleeping,
Beyond the sowing and the reaping,
      I shall be soon.
  _Love, rest, and home!
  Sweet hope!
  Lord, tarry not, but come._

Beyond the blooming and the fading
      I shall be soon;
Beyond the shining and the shading,
Beyond the hoping and the dreading,
      I shall be soon.
  _Love, rest, and home!_ etc.

Beyond the rising and the setting
      I shall be soon;
Beyond the calming and the fretting,
Beyond remembering and forgetting,
      I shall be soon.
  _Love, rest, and home!_ etc.

Beyond the gathering and the strowing
      I shall be soon;
Beyond the ebbing and the flowing.
Beyond the coming and the going,
      I shall be soon.
  _Love, rest, and home!_ etc.

Beyond the parting and the meeting
      I shall be soon;
Beyond the farewell and the greeting,
Beyond this pulse's fever beating,
      I shall be soon.
  _Love, rest, and home!_ etc.

Beyond the frost chain and the fever
      I shall be soon;
Beyond the rock waste and the river,
Beyond the ever and the never,
      I shall be soon.
  _Love, rest, and home!
  Sweet hope!
  Lord, tarry not, but come._

HORATIUS BONAR.



THE LAND O' THE LEAL.


I'm wearing awa', Jean,
Like snaw when it's thaw, Jean;
I'm wearing awa',
  To the land o' the leal.
There's nae sorrow there, Jean,
There's neither cauld nor care, Jean,
The day is aye fair
  In the land o' the leal.

Ye were aye leal and true, Jean;
Your task's ended noo, Jean,
And I'll welcome you
  To the land o' the leal.
Our bonnie bairn 's there, Jean,
She was baith guid and fair, Jean:
O, we grudged her right sair
  To the land o' the leal!

Then dry that tearfu' ee, Jean,
My soul langs to be free, Jean,
And angels wait on me
  To the land o' the leal!
Now fare ye weel, my ain Jean,
This warld's care is vain, Jean;
We'll meet and aye be fain
  In the land o' the leal.

CAROLINA, BARONESS NAIRNE.



ANTONY AND CLEOPATRA.

     "I am dying, Egypt, dying."--SHAKESPEARE'S
         _Antony and Cleopatra_, Act iv. Sc. 13.


I am dying, Egypt, dying.
  Ebbs the crimson life-tide fast,
And the dark Plutonian shadows
  Gather on the evening blast;
Let thine arms, O Queen, enfold me,
  Hush thy sobs and bow thine ear;
Listen to the great heart-secrets,
  Thou, and thou alone, must hear.

Though my scarred and veteran legions
  Bear their eagles high no more.
And my wrecked and scattered galleys
  Strew dark Actium's fatal shore,
Though no glittering guards surround me,
  Prompt to do their master's will,
I must perish like a Roman,
  Die the great Triumvir still.

Let not Caesar's servile minions
  Mock the lion thus laid low;
'T was no foeman's arm that felled him,
  'T was his own that struck the blow:
His who, pillowed on thy bosom,
  Turned aside from glory's ray,
His who, drunk with thy caresses,
  Madly threw a world away.

Should the base plebeian rabble
  Dare assail my name at Rome,
Where my noble spouse, Octavia,
  Weeps within her widowed home,
Seek her; say the gods bear witness--
  Altars, augurs, circling wings--
That her blood, with mine commingled,
  Yet shall mount the throne of kings.

As for thee, star-eyed Egyptian!
  Glorious sorceress of the Nile!
Light the path to Stygian horrors
  With the splendors of thy smile.
Give the Caesar crowns and arches,
  Let his brow the laurel twine;
I can scorn the Senate's triumphs,
  Triumphing in love like thine.

I am dying, Egypt, dying;
  Hark! the insulting foeman's cry.
They are coming--quick, my falchion!
  Let me front them ere I die.
Ah! no more amid the battle
  Shall my heart exulting swell;
Isis and Osiris guard thee!
  Cleopatra--Rome--farewell!

WILLIAM HAINES LYTLE.



HABEAS CORPUS.[9]


My body, eh? Friend Death, how now?
  Why all this tedious pomp of writ?
Thou hast reclaimed it sure and slow
  For half a century, bit by bit.

In faith thou knowest more to-day
  Than I do, where it can be found!
This shrivelled lump of suffering clay,
  To which I now am chained and bound,

Has not of kith or kin a trace
  To the good body once I bore;
Look at this shrunken, ghastly face:
  Didst ever see that face before?

Ah, well, friend Death, good friend thou art;
  Thy only fault thy lagging gait,
Mistaken pity in thy heart
  For timorous ones that bid thee wait.

Do quickly all thou hast to do,
  Nor I nor mine will hindrance make;
I shall be free when thou art through;
  I grudge thee naught that thou must take!

Stay! I have lied: I grudge thee one,
  Yes, two I grudge thee at this last,--
Two members which have faithful done
  My will and bidding in the past.

I grudge thee this right hand of mine;
  I grudge thee this quick-beating heart;
They never gave me coward sign,
  Nor played me once a traitor's part.

I see now why in olden days
  Men in barbaric love or hate
Nailed enemies' hands at wild crossways,
  Shrined leaders' hearts in costly state:

The symbol, sign, and instrument
  Of each soul's purpose, passion, strife,
Of fires in which are poured and spent
  Their all of love, their all of life.

O feeble, mighty human hand!
  O fragile, dauntless human heart!
The universe holds nothing planned
  With such sublime, transcendent art!

Yes, Death, I own I grudge thee mine
  Poor little hand, so feeble now;
Its wrinkled palm, its altered line,
  Its veins so pallid and so slow--

  (_Unfinished here_)

Ah, well, friend Death, good friend thou art:
  I shall be free when thou art through.
Take all there is--take hand and heart:
  There must be somewhere work to do.

  HELEN HUNT JACKSON.

  [9] Her last poem: 7 August, 1885.



FAREWELL, LIFE.

     WRITTEN DURING SICKNESS, APRIL, 1845.


Farewell, life! my senses swim.
And the world is growing dim;
Thronging shadows cloud the light,
Like the advent of the night,--
Colder, colder, colder still,
Upward steals a vapor chill;
Strong the earthly odor grows,--
I smell the mold above the rose!

Welcome, life! the spirit strives!
Strength returns and hope revives;
Cloudy fears and shapes forlorn
Fly like shadows at the morn,--
O'er the earth there comes a bloom;
Sunny light for sullen gloom,
Warm perfume for vapor cold,--
smell the rose above the mold!

THOMAS HOOD.



FOR ANNIE.


Thank Heaven! the crisis,--
  The danger is past,
And the lingering illness
  Is over at last,--
And the fever called "Living"
  Is conquered at last.

Sadly, I know,
  I am shorn of my strength,
And no muscle I move
  As I lie at full length,--
But no matter!--I feel
  I am better at length.

And I rest so composedly
  Now, in my bed,
That any beholder
  Might fancy me dead,--
Might start at beholding me,
  Thinking me dead.

The moaning and groaning,
  The sighing and sobbing,
Are quieted now,
  With that horrible throbbing
At heart,--ah, that horrible,
  Horrible throbbing!

The sickness, the nausea,
  The pitiless pain,
Have ceased, with the fever
   That maddened my brain,--
With the fever called "Living"
   That burned in my brain.

And O, of all tortures
   _That_ torture the worst
Has abated,--the terrible
   Torture of thirst
For the naphthaline river
   Of Passion accurst!
I have drunk of a water
   That quenches all thirst,

Of a water that flows,
   With a lullaby sound.
From a spring but a very few
   Feet under ground,
From a cavern not very far
   Down under ground.

And ah! let it never
   Be foolishly said
That my room it is gloomy
   And narrow my bed;
For man never slept
   In a different bed,--
And, to _sleep_ you must slumber
   In just such a bed.

My tantalized spirit
   Here blandly reposes,
Forgetting, or never
  Regretting, its roses,--
Its old agitations
  Of myrtles and roses:

For now, while so quietly
  Lying, it fancies
A holier odor
  About it, of pansies,--
A rosemary odor,
  Commingled with pansies,
With rue and the beautiful
  Puritan pansies.

And so it lies happily,
  Bathing in many
A dream of the truth
  And the beauty of Annie,--
Drowned in a bath
  Of the tresses of Annie.

She tenderly kissed me,
  She fondly caressed,
And then I fell gently
  To sleep on her breast,--
Deeply to sleep
  From the heaven of her breast.

When the light was extinguished,
  She covered me warm,
And she prayed to the angels
  To keep me from harm,--
To the queen of the angels
  To shield me from harm.

And I lie so composedly
  Now in my bed,
(Knowing her love,)
  That you fancy me dead;--
And I rest so contentedly
  Now in my bed,
(With her love at my breast,)
  That you fancy me dead,--
That you shudder to look at me,
  Thinking me dead:


But my heart it is brighter
  Than all of the many
Stars in the sky;
  For it sparkles with Annie,--
It glows with the light
  Of the love of my Annie,
With the thought of the light
  Of the eyes of my Annie.

EDGAR ALLAN POE



THALATTA! THALATTA!

     CRY OF THE TEN THOUSAND.


I stand upon the summit of my life,
Behind, the camp, the court, the field, the grove,
The battle, and the burden: vast, afar
Beyond these weary ways. Behold! the Sea!
The sea o'erswept by clouds and winds and wings;
By thoughts and wishes manifold, whose breath
Is freshness and whose mighty pulse is peace.
Palter no question of the horizon dim--
Cut loose the bark! Such voyage itself is rest,
Majestic motion, unimpeded scope,
A widening heaven, a current without care,
Eternity!--deliverance, promise, course!
Time-tired souls salute thee from the shore.

JOSEPH BROWNLEE BROWN.



THE SLEEP.

     "He giveth his beloved sleep."--PSALM cxxvii. 2.


Of all the thoughts of God that are
Borne inward unto souls afar,
Among the Psalmist's music deep,
Now tell me if that any is,
For gift or grace, surpassing this,--
"He giveth his beloved sleep "?

What would we give to our beloved?
The hero's heart, to be unmoved,--
The poet's star-tuned harp, to sweep,--
The patriot's voice, to teach and rouse,--
The monarch's crown, to light the brows?
"He giveth _his_ beloved sleep."

What do we give to our beloved?
A little faith, all undisproved,--
A little dust to overweep,
And bitter memories, to make
The whole earth blasted for our sake,
"He giveth _his_ beloved sleep."

"Sleep soft, beloved!" we sometimes say,
But have no tune to charm away
Sad dreams that through the eyelids creep;
But never doleful dream again
Shall break the happy slumber when
"He giveth _his_ beloved sleep."

O earth, so full of dreary noise!
O men, with wailing in your voice!
O delved gold the wailers heap!
O strife, O curse, that o'er it fall!
God strikes a silence through you all,
"He giveth his beloved sleep."

His dews drop mutely on the hill,
His cloud above it saileth still.
Though on its slope men sow and reap;
More softly than the dew is shed,
Or cloud is floated overhead,
"He giveth his beloved sleep."

For me, my heart, that erst did go
Most like a tired child at a show.
That sees through tears the mummers leap,
Would now its wearied vision close,
Would childlike on his love repose
Who "giveth his beloved sleep."

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



PROSPICE


Fear death?--to feel the fog in my throat,
  The mist in my face,
When the snows begin, and the blasts denote
  I am nearing the place,
The power of the night, the press of the storm,
  The post of the foe;
Where he stands, the Arch Fear in a visible form,
  Yet the strong man must go:
For the journey is done and the summit attained,
  And the barriers fall,
Though a battle's to fight ere the guerdon be gained,
  The reward of it all.
I was ever a fighter, so--one fight more,
  The best and the last!
I would hate that death bandaged my eyes, and forbore,
  And bade me creep past.
No! let me taste the whole of it, fare like my peers
  The heroes of old,
Bear the brunt, in a minute pay glad life's arrears
  Of pain, darkness and cold.
For sudden the worst turns the best to the brave,
  The black minute's at end,
And the elements' rage, the fiend-voices that rave,
  Shall dwindle, shall blend,
Shall change, shall become first a peace out of pain.

  Then a light, then thy breast,
O thou soul of my soul! I shall clasp thee again,
  And with God be the rest!

ROBERT BROWNING.



I WOULD NOT LIVE ALWAY.


I would not live alway--live alway below!
Oh no, I'll not linger when bidden to go:
The days of our pilgrimage granted us here
Are enough for life's woes, full enough for its cheer:
Would I shrink from the path which the prophets of God,
Apostles, and martyrs, so joyfully trod?
Like a spirit unblest, o'er the earth would I roam,
While brethren and friends are all hastening home?

I would not live alway: I ask not to stay
Where storm after storm rises dark o'er the way;
Where seeking for rest we but hover around,
Like the patriarch's bird, and no resting is found;
Where Hope, when she paints her gay bow in the air.
Leaves its brilliance to fade in the night of despair,
And joy's fleeting angel ne'er sheds a glad ray,
Save the gleam of the plumage that bears him away.

I would not live alway--thus fettered by sin,
Temptation without and corruption within;
In a moment of strength if I sever the chain,
Scarce the victory's mine, ere I'm captive again;
E'en the rapture of pardon is mingled with fears,
And the cup of thanksgiving with penitent tears:
The festival trump calls for jubilant songs,
But my spirit her own _miserere_ prolongs.

I would not live alway--no, welcome the tomb,
Since Jesus hath lain there I dread not its gloom;
Where he deigned to sleep, I'll too bow my head,
All peaceful to slumber on that hallowed bed.
Then the glorious daybreak, to follow that night,
The orient gleam of the angels of light,
With their clarion call for the sleepers to rise.
And chant forth their matins, away to the skies.

Who, who would live alway? away from his God,
Away from yon heaven, that blissful abode,
Where the rivers of pleasure flow o'er the bright plains,
And the noontide of glory eternally reigns;
Where the saints of all ages in harmony meet,
Their Saviour and brethren transported to greet,
While the songs of salvation exultingly roll
And the smile of the Lord is the feast of the soul.

That heavenly music! what is it I hear?
The notes of the harpers ring sweet in mine ear!
And see, soft unfolding those portals of gold,
The King all arrayed in his beauty behold!
Oh give me, oh give me, the wings of a dove,
To adore him--be near him--enwrapt with his love;
I but wait for the summons, I list for the word--
Alleluia--Amen--evermore with the Lord!

WILLIAM AUGUSTUS MUeHLENBERG.



FAREWELL.


I strove with none, for none was worth my strife;
  Nature I loved, and next to Nature, Art;
I warmed both hands before the fire of life,--
  It sinks, and I am ready to depart.

WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR.



LOVE AND DEATH.


Alas! that men must see
    Love, before Death!
Else they content might be
    With their short breath;
Aye, glad, when the pale sun
Showed restless day was done,
And endless Rest begun.

Glad, when with strong, cool hand
    Death clasped their own,
And with a strange command
    Hushed every moan;
Glad to have finished pain,
And labor wrought in vain,
Blurred by Sin's deepening stain.

But Love's insistent voice
    Bids self to flee--
"Live that I may rejoice,
    Live on, for me!"
So, for Love's cruel mind,
Men fear this Rest to find,
Nor know great Death is kind!


MARGARETTA WADE DELAND.



TO DEATH.


Methinks it were no pain to die
On such an eve, when such a sky
    O'er-canopies the west;
To gaze my fill on yon calm deep,
And, like an infant, fall asleep
    On Earth, my mother's breast.

There's peace and welcome in yon sea
Of endless blue tranquillity:
    These clouds are living things;
I trace their veins of liquid gold,
I see them solemnly unfold
    Their soft and fleecy wings.

These be the angels that convey
Us weary children of a day--
    Life's tedious nothing o'er--
Where neither passions come, nor woes,
To vex the genius of repose
    On Death's majestic shore.

No darkness there divides the sway
With startling dawn and dazzling day;
    But gloriously serene
Are the interminable plains:
One fixed, eternal sunset reigns
    O'er the wide silent scene.

I cannot doff all human fear;
I know thy greeting is severe
    To this poor shell of clay:
Yet come, O Death! thy freezing kiss
Emancipates! thy rest is bliss!
    I would I were away!

From the German of GLUCK.



ASLEEP, ASLEEP.

     "And so saying, he fell asleep."

     MARTYRDOM OF SAINT STEPHEN.


Asleep! asleep! men talk of "sleep,"
When all adown the silent deep
  The shades of night are stealing;
When like a curtain, soft and vast,
The darkness over all is cast,
And sombre stillness comes at last,
  To the mute heart appealing.

Asleep! asleep! when soft and low
The patient watchers come and go,
  Their loving vigil keeping;
When from the dear eyes fades the light,
When pales the flush so strangely bright,
And the glad spirit takes its flight,
  We speak of death as "sleeping."

Or when, as dies the orb of day,
The aged Christian sinks away,
  And the lone mourner weepeth;
When thus the pilgrim goes to rest,
With meek hands folded on his breast,
And his last sigh a prayer confessed--
  We say of such, "He sleepeth."

But when amidst a shower of stones,
And mingled curses, shrieks, and groans,
  The death-chill slowly creepeth;
When falls at length the dying head,
And streams the life-blood dark and red,
A thousand voices cry, "He's dead";
  But who shall say, "He sleepeth"?

"He fell asleep." A pen divine
Hath writ that epitaph of thine;
  And though the days are hoary,
Yet beautiful thy rest appears--
Unsullied by the lapse of years--
And still we read, with thankful tears,
  The tale of grace and glory.

Asleep! asleep! though not for thee
The touch of loving lips might be,
  In sadly sweet leave-taking:
Though not for thee the last caress,
The look of untold tenderness,
The love that dying hours can press
  From hearts with silence breaking.

LUCY A. BENNETT.



REST.


I lay me down to sleep,
  With little care
Whether my waking find
  Me here, or there.

A bowing, burdened head
  That only asks to rest,
Unquestioning, upon
  A loving breast.

My good right-hand forgets
  Its cunning now;
To march the weary march
  I know not how.

I am not eager, bold,
  Nor strong,--all that is past;
I am ready not to do,
  At last, at last.

My half-day's work is done,
  And this is all my part,--
I give a patient God
  My patient heart;

And grasp his banner still,
  Though all the blue be dim;
These stripes as well as stars
  Lead after him.

MARY WOOLSEY HOWLAND.



IN HARBOR.


I think it is over, over,
  I think it is over at last:
Voices of foemen and lover,
The sweet and the bitter, have passed:
Life, like a tempest of ocean
Hath outblown its ultimate blast:
There's but a faint sobbing seaward
While the calm of the tide deepens leeward,
And behold! like the welcoming quiver
Of heart-pulses throbbed through the river,
  Those lights in the harbor at last,
  The heavenly harbor at last!

I feel it is over! over!
  For the winds and the waters surcease;
Ah, few were the days of the rover
  That smiled in the beauty of peace,
And distant and dim was the omen
That hinted redress or release!
From the ravage of life, and its riot,
What marvel I yearn for the quiet
  Which bides in the harbor at last,--
For the lights, with their welcoming quiver
That throb through the sanctified river,
  Which girdle the harbor at last,
  This heavenly harbor at last?

I know it is over, over,
  I know it is over at last!
Down sail! the sheathed anchor uncover,
For the stress of the voyage has passed:
Life, like a tempest of ocean,
  Hath outbreathed its ultimate blast:
There's but a faint sobbing seaward,
While the calm of the tide deepens leeward;
And behold! like the welcoming quiver
Of heart-pulses throbbed through the river,
  Those lights in the harbor at last,
  The heavenly harbor at last!

PAUL HAMILTON HAYNE.



HUSH!


Oh, hush thee, Earth! Fold thou thy weary palms!
  The sunset glory fadeth in the west;
  The purple splendor leaves the mountain's crest;
Gray twilight comes as one who beareth alms,
Darkness and silence and delicious calms.
  Take thou the gift, O Earth! On Night's soft breast
  Lay thy tired head and sink to dreamless rest,
Lulled by the music of her evening psalms.
  Cool darkness, silence, and the holy stars,
  Long shadows when the pale moon soars on high,
    One far lone night-bird singing from the hill,
And utter rest from Day's discordant jars;
  O soul of mine! when the long night draws nigh
    Will such deep peace thine inmost being fill?

JULIA C.R. DORR.



LIFE.

     "Animula, vagula, blandula."


  Life! I know not what thou art,
But know that thou and I must part;
And when, or how, or where we met
I own to me's a secret yet.
But this I know, when thou art fled,
Where'er they lay these limbs, this head,
No clod so valueless shall be,
As all that then remains of me.
O, whither, whither dost thou fly,
Where bend unseen thy trackless course,
  And in this strange divorce,
Ah, tell where I must seek this compound I?

To the vast ocean of empyreal flame,
  From whence thy essence came,
  Dost thou thy flight pursue, when freed
  From matter's base uncumbering weed?
    Or dost thou, hid from sight,
    Wait, like some spell-bound knight,
Through blank, oblivious years the appointed hour
To break thy trance and reassume thy power?
Yet canst thou, without thought or feeling be?
O, say what art thou, when no more thou'rt thee?

Life! we've been long together,
Through pleasant and through cloudy weather;
  'Tis hard to part when friends are dear,--
  Perhaps 'twill cost a sigh, a tear:
  Then steal away, give little warning,
    Choose thine own time;
Say not Good Night,--but in some brighter clime
    Bid me Good Morning.

ANNA LETITIA BARBAULD.

       *       *       *       *       *




VI. CONSOLATION.



THE ANGEL OF PATIENCE.

     A FREE PARAPHRASE OF THE GERMAN.


To weary hearts, to mourning homes,
God's meekest Angel gently comes:
No power has he to banish pain,
Or give us back our lost again;
And yet in tenderest love our dear
And heavenly Father sends him here.

There's quiet in that Angel's glance,
There's rest in his still countenance!
He mocks no grief with idle cheer,
Nor wounds with words the mourner's ear;
But ills and woes he may not cure
He kindly trains us to endure.

Angel of Patience! sent to calm
Our feverish brows with cooling palm;
To lay the storms of hope and fear,
And reconcile life's smile and tear;
The throbs of wounded pride to still,
And make our own our Father's will!

O thou who mournest on thy way,
With longings for the close of day;
He walks with thee, that Angel kind,
And gently whispers, "Be resigned:
Bear up, bear on, the end shall tell
The dear Lord ordereth all things well!"

JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.



THEY ARE ALL GONE.


They are all gone into the world of light,
  And I alone sit lingering here!
Their very memory is fair and bright,
    And my sad thoughts doth clear;

It glows and glitters in my cloudy breast,
  Like stars upon some gloomy grove,--
Or those faint beams in which this hill is drest
    After the sun's remove.

I see them walking in an air of glory,
  Whose light doth trample on my days,--
My days which are at best but dull and hoary,
    Mere glimmering and decays.

O holy hope! and high humility,--
  High as the heavens above!
These are your walks, and you have showed them me
    To kindle my cold love.

Dear, beauteous death,--the jewel of the just,--
  Shining nowhere but in the dark!
What mysteries do lie beyond thy dust,
    Could man outlook that mark!

He that hath found some fledged bird's nest may know,
  At first sight, if the bird be flown;
But what fair dell or grove he sings in now,
    That is to him unknown.

And yet, as angels in some brighter dreams
  Call to the soul when man doth sleep,
So some strange thoughts transcend our wonted themes,
    And into glory peep.

If a star were confined into a tomb,
  Her captive flames must needs burn there,
But when the hand that locked her up gives room,
    She'll shine through all the sphere.

O Father of eternal life, and all
  Created glories under thee!
Resume thy spirit from this world of thrall
    Into true liberty.

Either disperse these mists, which blot and fill
  My perspective still as they pass;
Or else remove me hence unto that hill
    Where I shall need no glass.

HENRY VAUGHAN.



THE BOTTOM DRAWER.


In the best chamber of the house,
  Shut up in dim, uncertain light,
There stood an antique chest of drawers,
  Of foreign wood, with brasses bright.
One day a woman, frail and gray,
  Stepped totteringly across the floor--
"Let in," said she, "the light of day,
  Then, Jean, unlock the bottom drawer."

The girl, in all her youth's loveliness,
  Knelt down with eager, curious face;
Perchance she dreamt of Indian silks,
  Of jewels, and of rare old lace.
But when the summer sunshine fell
  Upon the treasures hoarded there,
The tears rushed to her tender eyes,
  Her heart was solemn as a prayer.

"Dear Grandmamma," she softly sighed,
  Lifting a withered rose and palm;
But on the elder face was naught
  But sweet content and peaceful calm.
Leaning upon her staff, she gazed
  Upon a baby's half-worn shoe;
A little frock of finest lawn;
  A hat with tiny bows of blue;

A ball made fifty years ago;
  A little glove; a tasselled cap;
A half-done "long division" sum;
  Some school-books fastened with a strap.
She touched them all with trembling lips--
  "How much," she said, "the heart can bear!
Ah, Jean! I thought that I should die
  The day that first I laid them there.

"But now it seems so good to know
  That through these weary, troubled years
Their hearts have been untouched by grief,
  Their eyes have been unstained by tears.
Dear Jean, we see with clearer sight
  When earthly love is almost o'er;
Those children wait me in the skies,
  For whom I locked that sacred drawer."

AMELIA EDITH BARR.



OVER THE RIVER.


Over the river they beckon to me,
  Loved ones who've crossed to the farther side,
The gleam of their snowy robes I see,
  But their voices are lost in the dashing tide.
There's one with ringlets of sunny gold,
  And eyes the reflection of heaven's own blue;
He crossed in the twilight gray and cold,
  And the pale mist hid him from mortal view.
We saw not the angels who met him there,
  The gates of the city we could not see:
Over the river, over the river,
  My brother stands waiting to welcome me.

Over the river the boatman pale
  Carried another, the household pet;
Her brown curls waved in the gentle gale,
  Darling Minnie! I see her yet.
She crossed on her bosom her dimpled hands,
  And fearlessly entered the phantom bark;
We felt it glide from the silver sands,
  And all our sunshine grew strangely dark;
We know she is safe on the farther side,
  Where all the ransomed and angels be:
Over the river, the mystic river,
  My childhood's idol is waiting for me.

For none returns from those quiet shores,
  Who cross with the boatman cold and pale;
We hear the dip of the golden oars,
  And catch a gleam of the snowy sail;
And lo! they have passed from our yearning hearts,
  They cross the stream and are gone for aye.
We may not sunder the veil apart
  That hides from our vision the gates of day;
We only know that their barks no more
  May sail with us o'er life's stormy sea;
Yet somewhere, I know, on the unseen shore,
  They watch, and beckon, and wait for me.

And I sit and think, when the sunset's gold
  Is flushing river and hill and shore,
I shall one day stand by the water cold,
  And list for the sound of the boatman's oar;
I shall watch for a gleam of the flapping sail,
  I shall hear the boat as it gains the strand,
I shall pass from sight with the boatman pale,
  To the better shore of the spirit land.
I shall know the loved who have gone before,
  And joyfully sweet will the meeting be,
When over the river, the peaceful river,
  The angel of death shall carry me.

NANCY WOODBURY PRIEST.



GRIEF FOR THE DEAD.


O hearts that never cease to yearn!
  O brimming tears that ne'er are dried!
The dead, though they depart, return
  As though they had not died!

The living are the only dead;
  The dead live,--nevermore to die;
And often, when we mourn them fled,
  They never were so nigh!

And though they lie beneath the waves,
  Or sleep within the churchyard dim,
(Ah! through how many different graves
  God's children go to him!)--

Yet every grave gives up its dead
  Ere it is overgrown with grass;
Then why should hopeless tears be shed,
  Or need we cry, "Alas"?

Or why should Memory, veiled with gloom,
  And like a sorrowing mourner craped,
Sit weeping o'er an empty tomb,
  Whose captives have escaped?

'Tis but a mound,--and will be mossed
  Whene'er the summer grass appears;
The loved, though wept, are never lost;
  We only lose--our tears!

Nay, Hope may whisper with the dead
  By bending forward where they are;
But Memory, with a backward tread,
  Communes with them afar.

The joys we lose are but forecast,
  And we shall find them all once more;
We look behind us for the Past,
  But lo! 'tis all before!

ANONYMOUS.



THE TWO WAITINGS.


I.

Dear hearts, you were waiting a year ago
  For the glory to be revealed;
You were wondering deeply, with bated breath,
  What treasure the days concealed.

O, would it be this, or would it be that?
  Would it be girl or boy?
Would it look like father or mother most?
  And what should you do for joy?

And then, one day, when the time was full,
  And the spring was coming fast,
The tender grace of a life outbloomed,
  And you saw your baby at last.

Was it or not what you had dreamed?
  It was, and yet it was not;
But O, it was better a thousand times
  Than ever you wished or thought.


II.

And now, dear hearts, you are waiting again,
  While the spring is coming fast;
For the baby that was a future dream
  Is now a dream of the past:

A dream of sunshine, and all that's sweet;
  Of all that is pure and bright;
Of eyes that were blue as the sky by day,
  And as clear as the stars by night.

You are waiting again for the fulness of time,
  And the glory to be revealed;
You are wondering deeply with aching hearts
  What treasure is now concealed.

O, will she be this, or will she be that?
  And what will there be in her face
That will tell you sure that she is your own,
  When you meet in the heavenly place?

As it was before, it will be again,
  Fashion your dream as you will;
When the veil is rent, and the glory is seen,
  It will more than your hope fulfil.

JOHN WHITE CHADWICK.



FOR CHARLIE'S SAKE.


The night is late, the house is still;
The angels of the hour fulfil
Their tender ministries, and move
From couch to couch in cares of love.
They drop into thy dreams, sweet wife,
The happiest smile of Charlie's life,
And lay on baby's lips a kiss,
Fresh from his angel-brother's bliss;
And, as they pass, they seem to make
A strange, dim hymn, "For Charlie's sake."

My listening heart takes up the strain,
And gives it to the night again,
Fitted with words of lowly praise,
And patience learned of mournful days,
And memories of the dead child's ways.
His will be done, His will be done!
Who gave and took away my son,
In "the far land" to shine and sing
Before the Beautiful, the King,
Who every day does Christmas make,
All starred and belled for Charlie's sake.

For Charlie's sake I will arise;
I will anoint me where he lies,
And change my raiment, and go in
To the Lord's house, and leave my sin
Without, and seat me at his board,
Eat, and be glad, and praise the Lord.
For wherefore should I fast and weep,
And sullen moods of mourning keep?
I cannot bring him back, nor he,
For any calling, come to me.
The bond the angel Death did sign,
God sealed--for Charlie's sake, and mine.

I'm very poor--this slender stone
Marks all the narrow field I own;
Yet, patient husbandman, I till
With faith and prayers, that precious hill,
Sow it with penitential pains,
And, hopeful, wait the latter rains;
Content if, after all, the spot
Yield barely one forget-me-not--
Whether or figs or thistle make
My crop content for Charlie's sake.

I have no houses, builded well--
Only that little lonesome cell,
Where never romping playmates come,
Nor bashful sweethearts, cunning-dumb--
An April burst of girls and boys,
Their rainbowed cloud of glooms and joys
Born with their songs, gone with their toys;
Nor ever is its stillness stirred
By purr of cat, or chirp of bird,
Or mother's twilight legend, told
Of Horner's pie, or Tiddler's gold,
Or fairy hobbling to the door,
Red-cloaked and weird, banned and poor,
To bless the good child's gracious eyes,
The good child's wistful charities,
And crippled changeling's hunch to make
Dance on his crutch, for good child's sake.

How is it with the child? 'Tis well;
Nor would I any miracle
Might stir my sleeper's tranquil trance,
Or plague his painless countenance:
I would not any seer might place
His staff on my immortal's face.
Or lip to lip, and eye to eye,
Charm back his pale mortality.
No, Shunamite! I would not break
God's stillness. Let them weep who wake.

For Charlie's sake my lot is blest:
No comfort like his mother's breast,
No praise like hers; no charm expressed
In fairest forms hath half her zest.
For Charlie's sake this bird's caressed
That death left lonely in the nest;
For Charlie's sake my heart is dressed,
As for its birthday, in its best;
For Charlie's sake we leave the rest.
To Him who gave, and who did take,
And saved us twice, for Charlie's sake.

JOHN WILLIAMSON PALMER.



WATCHING FOR PAPA.


She always stood upon the steps
  Just by the cottage door,
Waiting to kiss me when I came
  Each night home from the store.
Her eyes were like two glorious stars,
  Dancing in heaven's own blue--
"Papa," she'd call like a wee bird,
  "_I's looten out for oo!_"

Alas! how sadly do our lives
  Change as we onward roam!
For now no birdie voice calls out
  To bid me welcome home.
No little hands stretched out for me,
  No blue eyes dancing bright,
No baby face peeps from the door
  When I come home at night.

And yet there's comfort in the thought
  That when life's toil is o'er,
And passing through the sable flood
  I gain the brighter shore,
My little angel at the gate,
  With eyes divinely blue,
Will call with birdie voice, "Papa,
  _I's looten out for oo!_"

ANONYMOUS.



MY CHILD.


    I cannot make him dead!
    His fair sunshiny head
Is ever bounding round my study chair;
    Yet when my eyes, now dim
    With tears, I turn to him,
The vision vanishes,--he is not there!

    I walk my parlor floor,
    And, through the open door,
I hear a footfall on the chamber stair;
    I'm stepping toward the hall
    To give the boy a call;
And then bethink me that--he is not there!

    I thread the crowded street;
    A satchelled lad I meet,
With the same beaming eyes and colored hair;
    And, as he's running by,
    Follow him with my eye,
Scarcely believing that--he is not there!

    I know his face is hid
    Under the coffin lid;
Closed are his eyes; cold is his forehead fair;
    My hand that marble felt;
    O'er it in prayer I knelt;
Yet my heart whispers that--he is not there!

    I cannot make him dead!
    When passing by the bed,
So long watched over with parental care,
    My spirit and my eye
    Seek him inquiringly,
Before the thought comes, that--he is not there!

    When, at the cool gray break
    Of day, from sleep I wake.
With my first breathing of the morning air
    My soul goes up, with joy,
    To Him who gave my boy;
Then comes the sad thought that--he is not there!

    When at the day's calm close,
    Before we seek repose,
I'm with his mother, offering up our prayer;
    Whate'er I may be saying,
    I am in spirit praying
For our boy's spirit, though--he is not there!

    Not there!--Where, then, is he?
    The form I used to see
Was but the raiment that he used to wear.
    The grave, that now doth press
    Upon that cast-off dress,
Is but his wardrobe locked--he is not there!

    He lives!--In all the past
    He lives; nor, to the last,
Of seeing him again will I despair;
    In dreams I see him now;
    And, on his angel brow,
I see it written, "Thou shalt see me _there_!"
Yes, we all live to God!
    Father, thy chastening rod
So help us, thine afflicted ones, to bear,
    That, in the spirit land,
    Meeting at thy right hand,
'Twill be our heaven to find that--he is there!

JOHN PIERPONT.



SONG.


She's somewhere in the sunlight strong,
  Her tears are in the falling rain,
She calls me in the wind's soft song,
  And with the flowers she comes again.

Yon bird is but her messenger,
  The moon is but her silver car;
Yea! sun and moon are sent by her,
  And every wistful waiting star.

RICHARD LE GALLIENNE.



THE REAPER AND THE FLOWERS.


There is a Reaper whose name is Death,
  And, with his sickle keen,
He reaps the bearded grain at a breath,
  And the flowers that grow between.

"Shall I have naught that is fair?" saith he;
  "Have naught but the bearded grain?--
Though the breath of these flowers is sweet to me,
  I will give them all back again."

He gazed at the flowers with tearful eyes,
  He kissed their drooping leaves;
It was for the Lord of Paradise
  He bound them in his sheaves.

"My Lord has need of these flowerets gay,"
  The Reaper said, and smiled;
"Dear tokens of the earth are they,
  Where he was once a child.

"They shall all bloom in fields of light,
  Transplanted by my care,
And saints, upon their garments white,
  These sacred blossoms wear."

And the mother gave, in tears and pain,
  The flowers she most did love;
She knew she should find them all again
  In the fields of light above.

O, not in cruelty, not in wrath,
  The Reaper came that day;
'Twas an angel visited the green earth,
  And took the flowers away.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



"ONLY A YEAR."


One year ago,--a ringing voice,
    A clear blue eye,
And clustering curls of sunny hair,
    Too fair to die.

Only a year,--no voice, no smile,
    No glance of eye,
No clustering curls of golden hair,
    Fair but to die!

One year ago,--what loves, what schemes
    Far into life!
What joyous hopes, what high resolves,
    What generous strife!

The silent picture on the wall,
    The burial-stone,
Of all that beauty, life, and joy,
    Remain alone!

One year,--one year,--one little year,
    And so much gone!
And yet the even flow of life
    Moves calmly on.

The grave grows green, the flowers bloom fair,
    Above that head;
No sorrowing tint of leaf or spray
    Says he is dead.

No pause or hush of merry birds
    That sing above
Tells us how coldly sleeps below
    The form we love.

Where hast thou been this year, beloved?
    What hast thou seen,--
What visions fair, what glorious life,
    Where hast thou been?

The veil! the veil! so thin, so strong!
    'Twixt us and thee;
The mystic veil! when shall it fall,
    That we may see?

Not dead, not sleeping, not even gone,
    But present still,
And waiting for the coming hour
    Of God's sweet will.

Lord of the living and the dead,
    Our Saviour dear!
We lay in silence at thy feet
    This sad, sad year.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.



BLESSED ARE THEY THAT MOURN.


Oh, deem not they are blest alone
  Whose lives a peaceful tenor keep;
The Power who pities man, has shown
  A blessing for the eyes that weep.

The light of smiles shall fill again
  The lids that overflow with tears;
And weary hours of woe and pain
  Are promises of happier years.

There is a day of sunny rest
  For every dark and troubled night;
And grief may bide an evening guest,
  But joy shall come with early light.

And thou, who o'er thy friend's low bier
  Dost shed the bitter drops like rain,
Hope that a brighter, happier sphere
  Will give him to thy arms again.

Nor let the good man's trust depart,
  Though life its common gifts deny,--
Though with a pierced and bleeding heart,
  And spurned of men, he goes to die.

For God hath marked each sorrowing day
  And numbered every secret tear,
And heaven's long age of bliss shall pay
  For all his children suffer here.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.



DE PROFUNDIS.


The face which, duly as the sun,
Rose up for me with life begun,
To mark all bright hours of the day
With daily love, is dimmed away--
    And yet my days go on, go on.

The tongue which, like a stream, could run
Smooth music from the roughest stone,
And every morning with "Good day"
Make each day good, is hushed away--
    And yet my days go on, go on.

The heart which, like a staff, was one
For mine to lean and rest upon,
The strongest on the longest day,
With steadfast love is caught away--
    And yet my days go on, go on.

The world goes whispering to its own,
"This anguish pierces to the bone."
And tender friends go sighing round,
"What love can ever cure this wound?"
    My days go on, my days go on.

The past rolls forward on the sun
And makes all night. O dreams begun,
Not to be ended! Ended bliss!
And life, that will not end in this!
    My days go on, my days go on.

Breath freezes on my lips to moan:
As one alone, once not alone,
I sit and knock at Nature's door,
Heart-bare, heart-hungry, very poor,
    Whose desolated days go on.

I knock and cry--Undone, undone!
Is there no help, no comfort--none?
No gleaning in the wide wheat-plains
Where others drive their loaded wains?
    My vacant days go on, go on.

This Nature, though the snows be down,
Thinks kindly of the bird of June.
The little red hip on the tree
Is ripe for such. What is for me,
    Whose days so winterly go on?

No bird am I to sing in June,
And dare not ask an equal boon.
Good nests and berries red are Nature's
To give away to better creatures--
    And yet my days go on, go on.

_I_ ask less kindness to be done--
Only to loose these pilgrim-shoon
(Too early worn and grimed) with sweet
Cool deathly touch to these tired feet,
    Till days go out which now go on.

Only to lift the turf unmown
From off the earth where it has grown,
Some cubit-space, and say, "Behold,
Creep in, poor Heart, beneath that fold,
    Forgetting how the days go on."

A Voice reproves me thereupon,
More sweet than Nature's, when the drone
Of bees is sweetest, and more deep
Than when the rivers overleap
    The shuddering pines, and thunder on.

God's Voice, not Nature's--night and noon
He sits upon the great white throne,
And listens for the creature's praise.
What babble we of days and days?
    The Dayspring he, whose days go on!

He reigns above, he reigns alone:
Systems burn out and leave his throne:
Fair mists of seraphs melt and fall
Around him, changeless amid all--
    Ancient of days, whose days go on!

He reigns below, he reigns alone--
And having life in love forgone
Beneath the crown of sovran thorns,
He reigns the jealous God. Who mourns
    Or rules with HIM, while days go on?

By anguish which made pale the sun,
I hear him charge his saints that none
Among the creatures anywhere
Blaspheme against him with despair,
    However darkly days go on.

Take from my head the thorn-wreath brown:
No mortal grief deserves that crown.
O supreme Love, chief misery,
The sharp regalia are for _Thee_,
    Whose days eternally go on!

For us, ... whatever's undergone,
Thou knowest, willest what is done.
Grief may be joy misunderstood:
Only the Good discerns the good.
    I trust Thee while my days go on.

Whatever's lost, it first was won!
We will not struggle nor impugn.
Perhaps the cup was broken here
That Heaven's new wine might show more clear.
    I praise Thee while my days go on.

I praise Thee while my days go on;
I love Thee while my days go on!
Through dark and dearth, through fire and frost,
With emptied arms and treasure lost,
    I thank thee while my days go on!

And, having in thy life-depth thrown
Being and suffering (which are one),
As a child drops some pebble small
Down some deep well, and hears it fall
    Smiling--so I! THY DAYS GO ON!

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



BLESSED ARE THEY.


To us across the ages borne,
    Comes the deep word the Master said:
"Blessed are they that mourn;
    They shall be comforted!"

Strange mystery! It is better then
    To weep and yearn and vainly call,
Till peace is won from pain,
    Than not to grieve at all!

Yea, truly, though joy's note be sweet,
    Life does not thrill to joy alone.
The harp is incomplete
    That has no deeper tone.

Unclouded sunshine overmuch
    Falls vainly on the barren plain;
But fruitful is the touch
    Of sunshine after rain!

Who only scans the heavens by day
    Their story but half reads, and mars;
Let him learn how to say,
    "The night is full of stars!"

We seek to know Thee more and more,
  Dear Lord, and count our sorrows blest,
Since sorrow is the door
  Whereby Thou enterest.

Nor can our hearts so closely come
  To Thine in any other place,
As where, with anguish dumb,
  We faint in Thine embrace.

ROSSITER WORTHINGTON RAYMOND.



LINES

     TO THE MEMORY OF "ANNIE," WHO DIED AT MILAN, JUNE 6, 1860.

     "Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest
     thou? She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him,
     Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast
     laid him."--JOHN xx. 15.


In the fair gardens of celestial peace
  Walketh a gardener in meekness clad;
Fair are the flowers that wreathe his dewy locks,
  And his mysterious eyes are sweet and sad.

Fair are the silent foldings of his robes,
  Falling with saintly calmness to his feet;
And when he walks, each floweret to his will
  With living pulse of sweet accord doth beat.

Every green leaf thrills to its tender heart,
  In the mild summer radiance of his eye;
No fear of storm, or cold, or bitter frost,
  Shadows the flowerets when their sun is nigh.

And all our pleasant haunts of earthly love
  Are nurseries to those gardens of the air;
And his far-darting eye, with starry beam,
  Watching the growing of his treasures there.

We call them ours, o'erwept with selfish tears,
  O'erwatched with restless longings night and day;
Forgetful of the high, mysterious right
  He holds to bear our cherished plants away.

But when some sunny spot in those bright fields
  Needs the fair presence of an added flower,
Down sweeps a starry angel in the night:
  At morn the rose has vanished from our bower.

Where stood our tree, our flower, there is a grave!
  Blank, silent, vacant; but in worlds above,
Like a new star outblossomed in the skies,
  The angels hail an added flower of love.

Dear friend, no more upon that lonely mound,
  Strewed with the red and yellow autumn leaf,
Drop thou the tear, but raise the fainting eye
  Beyond the autumn mists of earthly grief.

Thy garden rosebud bore within its breast
  Those mysteries of color, warm and bright,
That the bleak climate of this lower sphere
  Could never waken into form and light.

Yes, the sweet Gardener hath borne her hence,
  Nor must thou ask to take her thence away;
Thou shalt behold her, in some coming hour,
  Full blossomed in his fields of cloudless day.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE.



DEATH IN YOUTH.

     FROM "FESTUS."


For to die young is youth's divinest gift;
To pass from one world fresh into another,
Ere change hath lost the charm of soft regret,
And feel the immortal impulse from within
Which makes the coming life cry always, On!
And follow it while strong, is heaven's last mercy.
There is a fire-fly in the south, but shines
When on the wing. So is't with mind. When once
We rest, we darken. On! saith God to the soul,
As unto the earth for ever. On it goes,
A rejoicing native of the infinite,
As is a bird, of air; an orb, of heaven.

PHILIP JAMES BAILEY.



IN MEMORIAM F.A.S.


Yet, O stricken heart, remember, O remember
  How of human days he lived the better part.
April came to bloom and never dim December
  Breathed its killing chills upon the head or heart.
Doomed to know not winter, only spring, a being
  Trod the flowery April blithely for a while,
Took his fill of music, joy of thought and seeing,
  Came and stayed and went, nor ever ceased to smile.

Came and stayed and went, and now when all is finished,
  You alone have crossed the melancholy stream,
Yours the pang, but his, O his, the undiminished
  Undecaying gladness, undeparted dream.

All that life contains of torture, toil, and treason,
  Shame, dishonor, death, to him were but a name.
Here, a boy, he dwelt through all the singing season
  And ere the day of sorrow departed as he came.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON.

Davos, 1881.



TEARS.


Thank God, bless God, all ye who suffer not
More grief than ye can weep for. That is well--
That is light grieving! lighter, none befell,
Since Adam forfeited the primal lot.
Tears! what are tears? The babe weeps in its cot,
The mother singing; at her marriage bell
The bride weeps; and before the oracle
Of high-faned hills, the poet has forgot
Such moisture on his cheeks. Thank God for grace,
Ye who weep only! If, as some have done,
Ye grope tear-blinded in a desert place,
And touch but tombs,--look up! Those tears will run
Soon in long rivers down the lifted face,
And leave the vision clear for stars and sun.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



RESIGNATION.


There is no flock, however watched and tended,
  But one dead lamb is there!
There is no fireside, howsoe'er defended,
  But has one vacant chair!

The air is full of farewells to the dying,
  And mournings for the dead;
The heart of Rachel, for her children crying,
  Will not be comforted!

Let us be patient! These severe afflictions
  Not from the ground arise,
But oftentimes celestial benedictions
  Assume this dark disguise.

We see but dimly through the mists and vapors;
  Amid these earthly damps
What seem to us but sad, funereal tapers
  May be heaven's distant lamps.

There is no death! What seems so is transition:
  This life of mortal breath
Is but a suburb of the life elysian,
  Whose portal we call Death.

She is not dead,--the child of our affection,--
  But gone unto that school
Where she no longer needs our poor protection,
  And Christ himself doth rule.

In that great cloister's stillness and seclusion,
  By guardian angels led,
Safe from temptation, safe from sin's pollution,
  She lives whom we call dead.

Day after day we think what she is doing
  In those bright realms of air;
Year after year, her tender steps pursuing,
  Behold her grown more fair.

Thus do we walk with her, and keep unbroken
  The bond which nature gives,
Thinking that our remembrance, though unspoken,
  May reach her where she lives.

Not as a child shall we again behold her;
  For when with raptures wild
In our embraces we again enfold her,
  She will not be a child:

But a fair maiden, in her Father's mansion,
  Clothed with celestial grace;
And beautiful with all the soul's expansion
  Shall we behold her face.

And though, at times, impetuous with emotion
  And anguish long suppressed,
The swelling heart heaves moaning like the ocean,
  That cannot be at rest,--

We will be patient, and assuage the feeling
  We may not wholly stay;
By silence sanctifying, not concealing,
  The grief that must have way.

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



CHRISTUS CONSOLATOR.


Beside the dead I knelt for prayer,
    And felt a presence as I prayed.
Lo! it was Jesus standing there.
    He smiled: "Be not afraid!"

"Lord, Thou hast conquered death we know;
    Restore again to life," I said,
"This one who died an hour ago."
    He smiled: "She is not dead!"

"Asleep then, as thyself did say;
    Yet thou canst lift the lids that keep
Her prisoned eyes from ours away!"
    He smiled: "She doth not sleep!"

"Nay then, tho' haply she do wake,
    And look upon some fairer dawn,
Restore her to our hearts that ache!"
    He smiled: "She is not gone!"

"Alas! too well we know our loss,
    Nor hope again our joy to touch,
Until the stream of death we cross."
    He smiled: "There is no such!"

"Yet our beloved seem so far,
    The while we yearn to feel them near,
Albeit with Thee we trust they are."
    He smiled: "And I am here!"

"Dear Lord, how shall we know that they
    Still walk unseen with us and Thee,
Nor sleep, nor wander far away?"
    He smiled: "Abide in Me."

ROSSITER WORTHINGTON RAYMOND.



COMFORT.


Speak low to me, my Saviour, low and sweet
From out the hallelujahs, sweet and low,
Lest I should fear and fall, and miss thee so
Who art not missed by any that entreat.
Speak to me as Mary at thy feet--
And if no precious gums my hands bestow,
Let my tears drop like amber, while I go
In reach of thy divinest voice complete
In humanest affection--thus in sooth,
To lose the sense of losing! As a child
Whose song-bird seeks the woods forevermore,
Is sung to instead by mother's mouth;
Till, sinking on her breast, love-reconciled,
He sleeps the faster that he wept before.

ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING.



THE SECRET OF DEATH.

"She is dead!" they said to him; "come away;
Kiss her and leave her,--thy love is clay!"

They smoothed her tresses of dark brown hair;
On her forehead of stone they laid it fair;

Over her eyes that gazed too much
They drew the lids with a gentle touch;

With a tender touch they closed up well
The sweet thin lips that had secrets to tell;

About her brows and beautiful face
They tied her veil and her marriage-lace,

And drew on her white feet her white silk shoes--
Which were the whitest no eye could choose!

And over her bosom they crossed her hands.
"Come away!" they said; "God understands!"
And there was silence, and nothing there
But silence, and scents of eglantere,

And jasmine, and roses, and rosemary;
And they said, "As a lady should lie, lies she."

And they held their breath till they left the room,
With a shudder, to glance at its stillness and gloom.

But he who loved her too well to dread
The sweet, the stately, the beautiful dead,

He lit his lamp and took the key
And turned it. Alone again--he and she!

He and she; but she would not speak,
Though he kissed, in the old place, the quiet cheek.

He and she; yet she would not smile,
Though he called her the name she loved ere-while.

He and she; still she did not move
To any one passionate whisper of love.

Then he said: "Cold lips, and breasts without breath,
Is there no voice, no language of death,

"Dumb to the ear and still to the sense,
But to heart and to soul distinct, intense?

"See now; I will listen with soul, not ear;
What was the secret of dying, dear?

"Was it the infinite wonder of all
That you ever could let life's flower fall?

"Or was it a greater marvel to feel
The perfect calm o'er the agony steal?

"Was the miracle greater to find how deep
Beyond all dreams sank downward that sleep?

"Did life roll back its records, dear,
And show, as they say it does, past things clear?

"And was it the innermost heart of the bliss
To find out, so, what a wisdom love is?

"O perfect dead! O dead most dear,
I hold the breath of my soul to hear!

"I listen as deep as to horrible hell,
As high as to heaven, and you do not tell.

"There must be pleasure in dying, sweet,
To make you so placid from head to feet!

"I would tell you, darling, if I were dead,
And 'twere your hot tears upon my brow shed,--

"I would say, though the angel of death had laid
His sword on my lips to keep it unsaid.

"You should not ask vainly, with streaming eyes,
Which of all death's was the chiefest surprise,

"The very strangest and suddenest thing
Of all the surprises that dying must bring."

Ah, foolish world! O, most kind dead!
Though he told me, who will believe it was said?

Who will believe that he heard her say,
With a sweet, soft voice, in the dear old way:

"The utmost wonder is this,--I hear,
And see you, and love you, and kiss you, dear;

"And am your angel, who was your bride,
And know that, though dead, I have never died."

SIR EDWIN ARNOLD.



PEACE.


There is the peace that cometh after sorrow,
  Of hope surrendered, not of hope fulfilled;
A peace that looketh not upon to-morrow,
  But calmly on a tempest that is stilled.

A peace which lives not now in joy's excesses,
  Nor in the happy life of love secure,
But in the unerring strength the heart possesses,
  Of conflicts won, while learning to endure.

A peace-there is, in sacrifice secluded,
  A life subdued, from will and passion free;
'Tis not the peace that over Eden brooded,
  But that which triumphed in Gethsemane.

ANONYMOUS.



FOOTSTEPS OF ANGELS.


When the hours of day are numbered,
  And the voices of the night
Wake the better soul that slumbered
  To a holy, calm delight,--

Ere the evening lamps are lighted,
  And, like phantoms grim and tall,
Shadows from the fitful firelight
  Dance upon the parlor wall;

Then the forms of the departed
  Enter at the open door,--
The beloved ones, the true-hearted,
  Come to visit me once more:

He, the young and strong, who cherished
  Noble longings for the strife,
By the roadside fell and perished,
  Weary with the march of life!

They, the holy ones and weakly,
  Who the cross of suffering bore,
Folded their pale hands so meekly,
  Spake with us on earth no more!

And with them the being beauteous
  Who unto my youth was given,
More than all things else to love me,
  And is now a saint in heaven.

With a slow and noiseless footstep,
  Comes that messenger divine,
Takes the vacant chair beside me,
  Lays her gentle hand in mine;

And she sits and gazes at me
  With those deep and tender eyes,
Like the stars, so still and saint-like,
  Looking downward from the skies.

Uttered not, yet comprehended,
  Is the spirit's voiceless prayer,
Soft rebukes, in blessings ended,
  Breathing from her lips of air.

O, though oft depressed and lonely,
  All my fears are laid aside
If I but remember only
  Such as these have lived and died!

HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.



HAPPY ARE THE DEAD.


I walked the other day, to spend my hour,
      Into a field,
Where I sometimes had seen the soil to yield
      A gallant flower:
But winter now had ruffled all the bower
      And curious store
    I knew there heretofore.

Yet I, whose search loved not to peep and peer
      In the face of things,
Thought with myself, there might be other springs
      Beside this here,
Which, like cold friends, sees us but once a year;
      And so the flower
    Might have some other bower.

Then taking up what I could nearest spy,
      I digged about
That place where I had seen him to grow out;
      And by and by
I saw the warm recluse alone to lie,
      Where fresh and green
    He lived of us unseen.

Many a question intricate and rare
      Did I there strow;
But all I could extort was, that he now
      Did there repair
Such losses as befell him in this air,
      And would erelong
    Come forth most fair and young.

This past, I threw the clothes quite o'er his head;
      And, stung with fear
Of my own frailty, dropped down many a tear
      Upon his bed;
Then, sighing, whispered, _Happy are the dead!
      What peace doth now
    Rock him asleep below!_

And yet, how few believe such doctrine springs
      From a poor root
Which all the winter sleeps here under foot,
      And hath no wings
To raise it to the truth and light of things,
      But is still trod
    By every wandering clod!

O thou whose spirit did at first inflame
      And warm the dead!
And by a sacred incubation fed
      With life this frame,
Which once had neither being, form, nor name!
      Grant I may so
    Thy steps track here below,

That in these masks and shadows I may see
      Thy sacred way;
And by those hid ascents climb to that day
      Which breaks from thee,
Who art in all things, though invisibly:
      Show me thy peace,
    Thy mercy, love, and ease.

And from this care, where dreams and sorrows reign,
      Lead me above,
Where light, joy, leisure, and true comforts move
      Without all pain:
There, hid in thee, show me his life again
      At whose dumb urn
    Thus all the year I mourn.

HENRY VAUGHAN.



THE GREEN GRASS UNDER THE SNOW.


The work of the sun is slow,
But as sure as heaven, we know;
    So we'll not forget,
    When the skies are wet,
There's green grass under the snow.

When the winds of winter blow,
Wailing like voices of woe,
    There are April showers,
    And buds and flowers,
And green grass under the snow.

We find that it's ever so
In this life's uneven flow;
    We've only to wait,
    In the face of fate,
For the green grass under the snow.

ANNIE A. PRESTON.



THE CONQUEROR'S GRAVE.


Within this lowly grave a Conqueror lies,
  And yet the monument proclaims it not,
Nor round the sleeper's name hath chisel wrought
  The emblems of a fame that never dies,
Ivy and amaranth in a graceful sheaf,
Twined with the laurel's fair, imperial leaf.
      A simple name alone,
      To the great world unknown,
Is graven here, and wild flowers, rising round,
Meek meadow-sweet and violets of the ground,
  Lean lovingly against the humble stone.

Here, in the quiet earth, they laid apart
  No man of iron mould and bloody hands,
Who sought to wreck upon the cowering lands
  The passions that consumed his restless heart:
But one of tender spirit and delicate frame,
      Gentlest in mien and mind,
      Of gentle womankind,
Timidly shrinking from the breath of blame;
One in whose eyes the smile of kindness made
  Its haunt, like flowers by sunny brooks in May,
Yet, at the thought of others' pain, a shade
  Of sweeter sadness chased the smile away.

Nor deem that when the hand that molders here
Was raised in menace, realms were chilled with fear,
  And armies mustered at the sign, as when
Clouds rise on clouds before the rainy East,
  Gray captains leading bands of veteran men
And fiery youths to be the vulture's feast.
Not thus were raged the mighty wars that gave
The victory to her who fills this grave;
      Alone her task was wrought,
      Alone the battle fought;
Through that long strife her constant hope was staid
  On God alone, nor looked for other aid.

She met the hosts of sorrow with a look
  That altered not beneath the frown they wore,
And soon the lowering brood were tamed, and took,
  Meekly, her gentle rule, and frowned no more.
Her soft hand put aside the assaults of wrath,
      And calmly broke in twain
      The fiery shafts of pain,
And rent the nets of passion from her path.
  By that victorious hand despair was slain.
With love she vanquished hate and overcame
Evil with good, in her Great Master's name.

Her glory is not of this shadowy state,
  Glory that with the fleeting season dies;
But when she entered at the sapphire gate
  What joy was radiant in celestial eyes!
How heaven's bright depths with sounding welcomes rung,
And flowers of heaven by shining hands were flung!
      And He who, long before,
      Pain, scorn, and sorrow bore,
The Mighty Sufferer, with aspect sweet,
Smiled on the timid stranger from his seat;
He who returning, glorious, from the grave,
Dragged Death, disarmed, in chains, a crouching slave.

See, as I linger here, the sun grows low;
  Cool airs are murmuring that the night is near.
Oh gentle sleeper, from thy grave I go
  Consoled though sad, in hope and yet in fear.
      Brief is the time, I know,
      The warfare scarce begun;
Yet all may win the triumphs thou hast won.
Still flows the fount whose waters strengthened thee;
  The victors' names are yet too few to fill
Heaven's mighty roll; the glorious armory,
  That ministered to thee, is open still.

WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.



THOU ART GONE TO THE GRAVE.


Thou art gone to the grave--but we will not deplore thee,
  Though sorrows and darkness encompass the tomb;
The Saviour has passed through its portals before thee,
  And the lamp of His love is thy guide through the gloom.

Thou art gone to the grave--we no longer behold thee,
  Nor tread the rough path of the world by thy side;
But the wide arms of mercy are spread to enfold thee,
  And sinners may hope, since the Sinless has died.

Thou art gone to the grave--and, its mansion forsaking,
  Perhaps thy tried spirit in doubt lingered long,
But the sunshine of heaven beamed bright on thy waking,
  And the song which thou heard'st was the seraphim's song.

Thou art gone to the grave--but 't were wrong to deplore thee,
  When God was thy ransom, thy guardian, thy guide;
He gave thee, and took thee, and soon will restore thee,
  Where death hath no sting, since the Saviour hath died.

REGINALD HEBER.



LYCIDAS.

Yet once more, O ye laurels, and once more
Ye myrtles brown, with ivy never sere,
I come to pluck your berries harsh and crude
And with forced fingers rude
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year,
Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear,
Compels me to disturb your season due;
For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer.
Who would not sing for Lycidas? He knew
Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
He must not float upon his watery bier
Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
Without the meed of some melodious tear.
  Begin then, sisters of the sacred well,
That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring,
Begin, and somewhat loudly sweep the string.
Hence with denial vain, and coy excuse;
So may some gentle muse
With lucky words favor my destined urn,
And as he passes turn,
And bid fair peace be to my sable shroud;
For we were nursed upon the self-same hill,
Fed the same flock by fountain, shade, and rill.
Together both, ere the high lawns appeared
Under the opening eyelids of the morn,
We drove a-field, and both together heard
What time the gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
Battening our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
Oft till the star that rose at evening bright
Toward heaven's descent had sloped his westering wheel.
Meanwhile the rural ditties were not mute,
Tempered to the oaten flute;
Rough satyrs danced, and fauns with cloven heel
From the glad song would not be absent long,
And old Damaetas loved to hear our song.
  But, oh, the heavy change, now thou art gone--
Now thou art gone, and never must return!
Thee, shepherd, thee the woods, and desert caves,
With wild thyme and the gadding vine o'ergrown,
And all their echoes, mourn;
The willows, and the hazel copses green,
Shall now no more be seen,
Fanning their joyous leaves to thy soft lays.
As killing as the canker to the rose,
Or taint-worm to the weanling herds that graze,
Or frost to flowers, that their gay wardrobe wear,
When first the white-thorn blows;
Such, Lycidas, thy loss to shepherd's ear.
  Where were ye, nymphs, when the remorseless deep
Closed o'er the head of your loved Lycidas?
For neither were ye playing on the steep,
Where your old bards, the famous druids, lie,
Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wizard stream--
Ay me! I fondly dream,
Had ye been there; for what could that have done?
What could the muse herself that Orpheus bore,
The muse herself for her enchanting son,
Whom universal nature did lament,
When, by the rout that made the hideous roar,
His gory visage down the stream was sent,
Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore?
  Alas! what boots it with incessant care
To tend the homely, slighted shepherd's trade,
And strictly meditate the thankless muse?
Were it not better done, as others use,
To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
Or with the tangles of Neaera's hair?
Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise
(That last infirmity of noble minds)
To scorn delights, and live laborious days;
But the fair guerdon when we hope to find,
And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
Comes the blind fury with the abhorred shears,
And slits the thin-spun life. But not the praise,
Phoebus replied, and touched my trembling ears;
Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
Nor in the glistering foil
Set off to the world, nor in broad rumor lies;
But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes
And perfect witness of all-judging Jove;
As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
Of so much fame in heaven expect thy meed.
  O fountain Arethuse, and thou honored flood,
Smooth-sliding Mincius, crowned with vocal reeds,
That strain I heard was of a higher mood;
But now my oat proceeds,
And listens to the herald of the sea
That came in Neptune's plea;
He asked the waves, and asked the felon winds,
What hard mishap hath doomed this gentle swain?
And questioned every gust of rugged winds
That blows from off each beaked promontory;
They knew not of his story;
And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
That not a blast was from his dungeon strayed;
The air was calm, and on the level brine
Sleek Panope with all her sisters played.
It was that fatal and perfidious bark,
Built in th' eclipse, and rigged with curses dark,
That sunk so low that sacred head of thine.
  Next Camus, reverend sire, went footing slow,
His mantle hairy, and his bonnet sedge,
Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge,
Like to that sanguine flower, inscribed with woe.
Ah! who hath reft (quoth he) my dearest pledge?
Last came, and last did go,
The pilot of the Galilean Lake;
Two massy keys he bore of metals twain
(The golden opes, the iron shuts amain);
He shook his mitred locks, and stern bespake:
How well could I have spared for thee, young swain,
Enow of such as for their bellies' sake
Creep, and intrude, and climb into the fold?
Of other care they little reckoning make,
Than how to scramble at the shearers' feast,
And shove away the worthy bidden guest;
Blind mouths! that scarce themselves know how to hold
A sheep-hook, or have learned aught else the least
That to the faithful herdsman's art belongs!
What recks it them? what need they? they are sped;
And when they list, their lean and flashy songs
Grate on their scrannel pipes of wretched straw;
The hungry sheep look up, and are not fed,
But, swollen with wind and the rank mist they draw,
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread;
Besides what the grim wolf with privy paw
Daily devours apace, and nothing said;
But that two-handed engine at the door,
Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more.
  Return, Alpheus, the dread voice is past,
That shrunk thy streams; return, Sicilian muse,
And call the vales, and bid them hither cast
Their bells, and flowerets of a thousand hues.
Ye valleys low, where the mild whispers use
Of shades, and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
On whose fresh lap the swart-star sparely looks,
Throw hither all your quaint enamelled eyes,
That on the green turf suck the honeyed showers,
And purple all the ground with vernal flowers.
Bring the rathe primrose that forsaken dies,
The tufted crow-toe, and pale jessamine,
The white pink, and the pansy freaked with jet,
The glowing violet,
The musk-rose, and the well-attired woodbine,
With cowslips wan that hang the pensive head,
And every flower that sad embroidery wears.
Bid Amaranthus all his beauty shed,
And daffodillies fill their cups with tears,
To strew the laureat hearse where Lycid lies,
For so to interpose a little ease,
Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
Ay me! whilst thee the shores and sounding seas
Wash far away where'er thy bones are hurled,
Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides,
Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world;
Or whether thou to our moist vows denied,
Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old,
Where the great vision of the guarded mount
Looks towards Namancos and Bayona's hold;
Look homeward angel now, and melt with ruth!
And, O ye dolphins, waft the hapless youth!
  Weep no more, woful shepherds, weep no more!
For Lycidas your sorrow is not dead,
Sunk though he be beneath the watery floor.
So sinks the day-star in the ocean bed,
And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
And tricks his beams, and with new-spangled ore
Flames in the forehead of the morning sky;
So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high,
Through the dear might of Him that walked the waves,
Where, other groves and other streams along,
With nectar pure his oozy locks he laves,
And hears the unexpressive nuptial song,
In the blest kingdoms meek of joy and love.
There entertain him all the saints above,
In solemn troops and sweet societies,
That sing, and singing in their glory move,
And wipe the tears forever from his eyes.
Now, Lycidas, the shepherds weep no more;
Henceforth thou art the genius of the shore,
In thy large recompense, and shalt be good
To all that wander in that perilous flood.
  Thus sang the uncouth swain to th' oaks and rills,
While the still morn went out with sandals gray;
He touched the tender stops of various quills,
With eager thought warbling his Doric lay.
And now the sun had stretched out all the hills,
And now was dropt into the western bay;
At last he rose, and twitched his mantle blue:
To-morrow to fresh, woods and pastures new.

MILTON.



AFTER DEATH.

     FROM "PEARLS OF THE FAITH."

     _He made life--and He takes it--but instead
      Gives more: praise the Restorer, Al-Mu'hid!_


He who dies at Azan[11] sends
This to comfort faithful friends:--

Faithful friends! it lies, I know,
Pale and white and cold as snow;
And ye says, "Abdullah's dead!"
Weeping at my feet and head.
I can see your falling tears,
I can hear your cries and prayers,
Yet I smile and whisper this:--
"I am not that thing you kiss;
Cease your tears and let it lie:
It was mine, it is not I."

Sweet friends! what the women lave
For its last bed in the grave
Is a tent which I am quitting,
Is a garment no more fitting,
Is a cage from which at last
Like a hawk my soul hath passed.
Love the inmate, not the room;
The wearer, not the garb; the plume
Of the falcon, not the bars
Which kept him from the splendid stars.
Loving friends! be wise, and dry
Straightway every weeping eye:
What ye lift upon the bier
Is not worth a wistful tear.
'Tis an empty sea-shell, one
Out of which the pearl is gone.
The shell is broken, it lies there;
The pearl, the all, the soul, is here.
'Tis an earthen jar whose lid
Allah sealed, the while it hid
That treasure of His treasury,
A mind which loved him: let it lie!
Let the shard be earth's once more,
Since the gold shines in His store!

Allah Mu'hid, Allah most good!
Now thy grace is understood:
Now my heart no longer wonders
What Al-Barsakh is, which sunders
Life from death, and death from heaven:
Nor the "Paradises Seven"
Which the happy dead inherit;
Nor those "birds" which bear each spirit
Toward the Throne, "green birds and white,"
Radiant, glorious, swift their flight!
Now the long, long darkness ends.
Yet ye wail, my foolish friends,
While the man whom ye call "dead"
In unbroken bliss instead
Lives, and loves you: lost, 'tis true
By any light which shines for you;
But in light ye cannot see
Of unfulfilled felicity,
And enlarging Paradise;
Lives the life that never dies.

Farewell, friends! Yet not farewell;
Where I am, ye too shall dwell.
I am gone before your face
A heart-beat's time, a gray ant's pace.
When ye come where I have stepped,
Ye will marvel why ye wept;
Ye will know, by true love taught,
That here is all, and there is naught.
Weep awhile, if ye are fain,--
Sunshine still must follow rain!
Only not at death, for death--
Now I see--is that first breath
Which our souls draw when we enter
Life, that is of all life center.

Know ye Allah's law is love,
Viewed from Allah's Throne above;
Be ye firm of trust, and come
Faithful onward to your home!
"_La Allah ilia Allah!_ Yea,
Mu'hid! Restorer! Sovereign!" say!

_He who died at Asan gave
This to those that made his grave._

SIR EDWIN ARNOLD.

  [11] The hour of prayer; esteemed a blessed time to die.



IT IS NOT DEATH TO DIE.


It is not death to die,
  To leave this weary road,
And, midst the brotherhood on high,
  To be at home with God.

It is not death to close
  The eye long dimmed by tears,
And wake in glorious repose,
  To spend eternal years.

It is not death to bear
  The wrench that sets us free
From dungeon-chain, to breathe the air
  Of boundless liberty.

It is not death to fling
  Aside this sinful dust,
And rise on strong, exulting wing,
  To live among the just.

Jesus, thou Prince of Life,
  Thy chosen cannot die!
Like Thee they conquer in the strife,
  To reign with Thee on high.

GEORGE WASHINGTON BETHUNE.



THERE IS NO DEATH.


There is no death! the stars go down
  To rise upon some other shore,
And bright in heaven's jewelled crown
  They shine forever more.

There is no death! the forest leaves
  Convert to life the viewless air;
The rocks disorganize to feed
  The hungry moss they bear.

There is no death! the dust we tread
  Shall change, beneath the summer showers,
To golden grain, or mellow fruit,
  Or rainbow-tinted flowers.

There is no death! the leaves may fall.
  The flowers may fade and pass away--
They only wait, through wintry hours,
  The warm sweet breath of May.

There is no death! the choicest gifts
  That heaven hath kindly lent to earth
Are ever first to seek again
  The country of their birth.

And all things that for growth of joy
  Are worthy of our love or care,
Whose loss has left us desolate,
  Are safely garnered there.

Though life become a dreary waste,
  We know its fairest, sweetest flowers,
Transplanted into paradise,
  Adorn immortal bowers.

The voice of bird-like melody
  That we have missed and mourned so long
Now mingles with the angel choir
  In everlasting song.

There is no death! although we grieve
  When beautiful, familiar forms
That we have learned to love are torn
  From our embracing arms;

Although with bowed and breaking heart,
  With sable garb and silent tread,
We bear their senseless dust to rest,
  And say that they are "dead."

They are not dead! they have but passed
  Beyond the mists that blind us here
Into the new and larger life
  Of that serener sphere.

They have but dropped their robe of clay
  To put their shining raiment on;
They have not wandered far away--
  They are not "lost" or "gone."

Though disenthralled and glorified,
  They still are here and love us yet;
The dear ones they have left behind
  They never can forget.

And sometimes, when our hearts grow faint
  Amid temptations fierce and deep,
Or when the wildly raging waves
  Of grief or passion sweep,

We feel upon our fevered brow
  Their gentle touch, their breath of balm;
Their arms enfold us, and our hearts
  Grow comforted and calm.

And ever near us, though unseen,
  The dear, immortal spirits tread;
For all the boundless universe
  Is life--there are no dead.

JAMES L. M'CREERY.

1863.



GOING AND COMING.


Going--the great round Sun,
  Dragging the captive Day
Over behind the frowning hill,
  Over beyond the bay,--
          Dying:
Coming--the dusky Night,
  Silently stealing in,
Wrapping himself in the soft warm couch
  Where the golden-haired Day hath been
          Lying.

Going--the bright, blithe Spring;
  Blossoms! how fast ye fall,
Shooting out of your starry sky
  Into the darkness all
          Blindly!
Coming--the mellow days:
  Crimson and yellow leaves;
Languishing purple and amber fruits
  Kissing the bearded sheaves
          Kindly!

Going--our early friends;
  Voices we loved are dumb;
Footsteps grow dim in the morning dew;
  Fainter the echoes come
          Ringing:
Coming to join our march,--
  Shoulder to shoulder pressed,--
Gray-haired veterans strike their tents
  For the far-off purple West--
          Singing!

Going--this old, old life;
  Beautiful world, farewell!
Forest and meadow! river and hill!
  Ring ye a loving knell
          O'er us!
Coming--a nobler life;
  Coming--a better land;
Coming--a long, long, nightless day;
  Coming--the grand, grand
          Chorus!

EDWARD A. JENKS.



BLIND.


Laughing, the blind boys
Run 'round their college lawn,
Playing such games of buff
Over its dappled grass!

See the blind frolicsome
Girls in blue pinafores,
Turning their skipping ropes!

How full and rich a world
Theirs to inhabit is!
Sweet scent of grass and bloom,
Playmates' glad symphony.
Cool touch of western wind,
Sunshine's divine caress.
How should they know or feel
They are in darkness?

But--O the miracle!
If a Redeemer came,
Laid fingers on their eyes--
One touch--and what a world
New born in loveliness!

Spaces of green and sky,
Hulls of white cloud adrift,
Ivy-grown college walls,
Shining loved faces!

What a dark world--who knows?
Ours to inhabit is!
One touch, and what a strange
Glory might burst on us!
What a hid universe!

Do we sport carelessly,
Blindly, upon the verge
Of an Apocalypse?

ISRAEL ZANGWILL.



THE DEATH OF DEATH.

     SONNET CXLVI.


Poor soul, the centre of my sinful earth,
Fooled by those rebel powers that thee array,
Why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth,
Painting thy outward walls so costly gay?
Why so large cost, having so short a lease,
Dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend?
Shall worms, inheritors of this excess,
Eat up thy charge? Is this thy body's end?
Then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss,
And let that pine to aggravate thy store;
Buy terms divine in selling hours of dross;
Within be fed, without be rich no more.
  So shalt thou feed on Death, that feeds on men,
  And, Death once dead, there's no more dying then.

SHAKESPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *




INDEX: TITLES AND AUTHORS

_For occupation, nativity, etc., of Authors, and the American publishers
of the American poetical works, see General Index of Authors, Volume X._



AESCHYLUS.                                                           PAGE.
  Wail of Prometheus Bound, The (_Mrs. Browning's Translation_)      156

AGATHIAS.
  Time's Revenge (_Bland's Translation_)                              72

ALDRICH, JAMES.
  Death-Bed, A                                                       306

ALGER, WILLIAM ROUNSEVILLE.
  Parting Lovers, The (_From the Chinese_)                           104

ALLINGHAM, WILLIAM.
  Dirty Old Man, The                                                  55

ARNOLD, SIR EDWIN.
  After Death in Arabia.                                             452
  Secret of Death, The                                               434

ARNOLD, MATTHEW.
  Requiescat                                                         307

AUSTIN, ALFRED.
  Agatha                                                              13

AUSTIN, SARAH TAYLOR.
  Passage, the (_German of Uhland_)                                  342

AYTON OR AYTOUN, SIR ROBERT.
  Woman's Inconstancy                                                 71


BACON, FRANCIS, BARON VERULAM.
  World, The                                                         151

BAILEY, PHILIP JAMES.
  Death in Youth (_Festus_)                                          428

BALLANTINE, JAMES.
  "Ilka blade o' grass keps its ain drap o' dew"                     241

BARBAULD, ANNA LAETITIA.
  Life                                                               400

BARNARD, LADY ANNE.
  Auld Robin Gray                                                     32

BARR, AMELIA EDITH.
  Bottom Drawer, The                                                 405

BEAUMONT, FRANCIS.
  On the Tombs in Westminster Abbey                                  269

BENJAMIN, PARK.
  Old Sexton, The                                                    282

BENNETT, LUCY A.
  "Asleep! asleep!"                                                  396

BERANGER, PIERRE-JEAN DE.
  Old Vagabond, The (_Translation_)                                  188

BETHUNE, GEORGE WASHINGTON.
  "It is not death to die"                                           455

BJOeRNSON, BJOeRSTJERNE.
  Princess, The (_Dole's Translation_)                                 9

BLACKIE, JOHN STUART.
  Emigrant Lassie, The                                               280

BLAMIRE, SUSANNA.
  "What ails this heart o' mine"                                     139

BLAND, ROBERT.
  Time's Revenge (_Greek of Agathias_)                                72

BLOOD, HENRY AMES.
  Song of Savoyards                                                  248

BODENSTEDT, FRIEDRICH MARTIN VON.
  Unchanging (_Translation_)                                         242

BONAR, HORATIUS.
  "Beyond the smiling and the weeping"

BRENAN, JOSEPH.
  "Come to me, dearest"                                              144

BRIDGES, ROBERT (_Droch_).
  Unillumined Verge, The                                             308

BONAR, HORATIUS.
  "Beyond the smiling and the weeping"                               378

BROOKS, MARIA GOWEN (_Maria del Occidente_).
  Song of Egla                                                       138

BROWN, JOSEPH BROWNLEE.
  Thalatta! Thalatta!                                                388

BROWNING, ELIZABETH BARRETT.
  Comfort                                                            433
  De Profundis                                                       421
  Hopeless Grief                                                     217
  Mother and Poet                                                    323
  Sleep, The                                                         389
  Tears                                                              429
  Wail of Prometheus Bound, The (_Greek of AEschylus_)                156

BROWNING, ROBERT.
  Evelyn Hope                                                        310
  Prospice                                                           391

BRYANT, WILLIAM CULLEN.
  Blessed are They that Mourn                                        420
  Conqueror's Grave, The                                             442
  Thanatopsis                                                        264

BURDETTE, ROBERT JONES.
  "When my ship comes in"                                            245

BURNS, ROBERT.
  "Ae fond kiss, and then we sever"                                   98
  Banks o' Doon, The                                                  12
  Highland Mary                                                      329
  "I love my Jean"                                                   126
  Mary in Heaven, To                                                 339
  "O my Luve's like a red, red rose"                                  99
  "O, saw ye bonnie Leslie"                                          130

BURROUGHS, JOHN.
  Waiting                                                            238

BYRON, GEORGE NOEL GORDON, LORD.
  "Adieu, adieu, my native shore"                                    108
  Dream, The                                                          73
  Farewell to his Wife                                               109
  Latest Verses                                                      169
  "Maid of Athens, ere we part"                                      100
  Picture of Death, A (The Giaour)                                   261


CAMOENS, LUIS DE.
  Blighted Love (_Strongford's Translation_)                          81

CARLETON, WILL.
  "Over the hill to the poor-house"                                  175

CARY, HENRY FRANCIS.
  "The fairest thing in mortal eyes" (_French of Duke of Orleans_)   356

CHADWICK, JOHN WHITE.
  Two Waitings, The                                                  409

CHANNING, WILLIAM ELLERY.
  Sleepy Hollow                                                      277

CHATEAUBRIAND, FRANCOIS AUGUSTE, VICOMTE DE.
  Jeune Fille et Jeune Fleur (_Translation_)                         305

CHATTERTON, THOMAS.
  Minstrel's Song                                                    340

CLOUGH, ARTHUR HUGH.
  Despondency Rebuked                                                235
  Qua Cursum Ventus                                                  107

COLERIDGE, SAMUEL TAYLOR.
  Good, Great Man, The                                               244

COSTELLO, LOUISE STUART.
  On the Death of Francis I. (_French of Marguerite_)                338
  Sonnet (_French of Labe)                                           237
  To Diane de Poitiers (_French of Marat_)                            69

COWPER, WILLIAM.
  Present Good, The (_The Task_)                                     150

CRABBE, GEORGE.
  Approach of Age, The (_Tales of the Hall_)                         163

CRAIK, DINAH MARIA MULOCK.
  Now and Afterwards                                                 268
  Only a Woman                                                        86
  Too Late                                                           335

CRANCH, CHRISTOPHER PEARSE.
  Compensation                                                       229

CRAWFORD, JULIA (or LOUISA MACARTNEY).
  Kathleen Mavourneen                                                112
  "We parted in silence"                                             113


DELAND, MARGARETTA WADE.
  Love and Death                                                     394

DE VERE, AUBREY THOMAS.
  "Sad is our youth, for it is ever going"                           225

DE VERE, MARY AINGE (_Madeline Bridges_).
  Spinner, The                                                        70

DOBELL, SYDNEY THOMPSON.
  Home, Wounded                                                       58

DOBSON, AUSTIN.
  Sun-Dial, The                                                       15

DODGE, MARY ELIZABETH MAPES.
  Two Mysteries, The (_Along the Way_)                               262

DOLE, NATHAN HASKELL.
  Princess, The (_Norwegian of Bjornson_)                              9

DORR, JULIA CAROLINE RIPLEY.
  Hush! (_After glow_)                                               400

DRAYTON, MICHAEL.
  "Come, let us kisse and parte"                                     111

DUFFERIN, HELEN BELINDA SHERIDAN, LADY (_afterwards_ LADY GIFFORD).
  Lament of the Irish Emigrant                                       343


EASTMAN, ELAINE GOODALE.
  Ashes of Roses                                                      51

EDWARDS, AMELIA BLANDFORD.
  "Give me three grains of corn, mother"                             197


FIELD, EUGENE.
  Jim's Kids                                                         290

FITZGERALD, EDWARD.
  Anne Allen, On                                                     303

FLEMING, PAUL.
  Myself, To (_Winkworth's Translation_)                             218

FLETCHER, JOHN.
  "Hence, all ye vain delights"                                      160
  "Take, O, take those lips away" (_Bloody Brother_)                  71

FOSTER, STEPHEN COLLINS.
  My Old Kentucky Home                                               147
  Old Folks at Home                                                  148


GANNETT, WILLIAM CHANNING.
  Aunt Phillis's Guest                                               239

GAY, JOHN.
  Black-Eyed Susan                                                   102

GLADDEN, WASHINGTON.
  Awakening                                                          375

GLUCK, ----
  To Death (_Translation_)                                           395

GRAY, THOMAS.
  Elegy written in a Country Churchyard                              270


HARDINGE, WILLIAM M.
  Grave of Sophocles (_Greek of Simmias_)                            200

HAWTREY, E.C.
  Hector to his Wife (_Greek of Homer_)                              122

HAY, JOHN.
  Woman's Love, A                                                     52

HAYNE, PAUL HAMILTON.
  In Harbor                                                          398

HEBER, REGINALD.
  "Thou art gone to the grave"                                       445

HEINE, HEINRICH.
  Palm and the Pine, The (_Houghton's Translation_)                   40

HEMANS. FELICIA DOROTHEA BROWNE.
  Hour of Death, The                                                 259

HENLEY, WILLIAM ERNEST.
  Invictus                                                           221

HERBERT, GEORGE.
  Flower, The                                                        219
  Virtue Immortal                                                    254

HOBART, MRS. CHARLES.
  Changed Cross, The                                                 231

HOLMES, OLIVER WENDELL.
  Last Leaf, The                                                     185
  Voiceless, The                                                     172

HOMER.
  Hector to his Wife (_Hawtrey's Translation_)                       122
  Parting of Hector and Andromache (_Pope's Translation_)            118

HOOD, THOMAS.
  Bridge of Sighs, The                                               208
  Death-Bed, The                                                     300
  "Farewell, Life"                                                   384
  Song of the Shirt, The                                             199
  "What can an old man do but die"                                   174

HOUGHTON, RICHARD MONCKTON MILNES, LORD.
  London Churches                                                    207
  Palm and the Pine, The (_German of Heine_)                          40

HOWLAND, MARY WOOLSEY.
  Rest                                                               397

HOYT, RALPH.
  Old                                                                180

HUDSON, MARY CLEMMER AMES.
  Something Beyond                                                   234


INGELOW, JEAN.
  Divided                                                             64


JACKSON, HELEN FISKE HUNT (_H.H._).
  Habeas Corpus                                                      382

JACKSON, HENRY R.
  My Wife and Child                                                  226

JENKS, EDWARD A.
  Going and Coming                                                   458


KEATS, JOHN.
  Nightingale, Ode to a                                              166

KEMBLE, FRANCES ANNE.
  Absence                                                            133
  Faith                                                               95

KENNEDY, CRAMMOND.
  Greenwood Cemetery                                                 279

KEPPEL, LADY CAROLINE.
  Robin Adair                                                        134

KING, HENRY.
  Sic Vita                                                           253

KINGSLEY, CHARLES.
  Rough Rhyme on a Rough Matter, A                                   191

KNOX, WILLIAM.
  Mortality                                                          256


LABE, LOUISE.
  Sonnet (_Costello's Translation_)                                  237

LAMB, CHARLES.
  Old Familiar Faces, The                                            143

LANDON, LETITIA ELIZABETH (_later_ MRS. MACLEAN).
  Female Convict, The                                                215

LANDOR, WALTER SAVAGE.
  Farewell                                                           394
  Man                                                                151

LANG, ANDREW.
  Lament for Heliodore (_Greek of Meleager_)                         337

LE GALLIENNE, RICHARD.
  Song (_Robert Louis Stevenson an Elegy and other Poems_)           417
  What of the Darkness (_English_ Poems)                             360

LE ROUX, GUIRAUD.
  Fidelity in Doubt (_Preston's Translation_)                         95

LINDSAY, BLANCHE ELIZABETH FITZROY, LADY.
  Sonnet                                                             304

LOCKER-LAMPSON, FREDERICK.
  Widow's Mite, The                                                  287

LOGAN, JOHN.
  "Thy braes were bonny"                                             314

LONGFELLOW, HENRY WADSWORTH.
  Death of Minnehaha, The (Song of Hiawatha)                         319
  Footsteps of Angels                                                438
  God's Acre                                                         276
  Rainy Day, The                                                     228
  Reaper and the Flowers, The                                        417
  Resignation                                                        430

LOVELACE, COLONEL RICHARD.
  Lucasta, To                                                        123
  Lucasta, on Going to the Wars, To                                   97

LOWELL, JAMES RUSSELL.
  Auf Wiedersehen                                                    114
  First Snow-Fall, The                                               283
  Palinode                                                           115

LOWELL, MARIA WHITE.
  Morning-Glory, The                                                 285

LYTLE, WILLIAM HAINES.
  Antony and Cleopatra                                               380

LYTTON, EDWARD ROBERT BULWER, EARL OF (_Owen Meredith_).
  Portrait, The                                                       82


MCCLEERY, J.L.
  "There is no death"                                                456

MACMANUS, ANNA JOHNSTON (MRS. SEUMAS) (_Ethna Carbery_).
  Thinkin' Long                                                      141

MARGUERITE DE VALOIS.
  On the Death of Francis I. (_Costello's Translation_)              338

MAROT, CLEMENT.
  To Diane de Poitiers (_Costello's Translation_)                     69

MARSTON, PHILIP BOURKE.
  After Summer                                                       336

MELEAGER.
  Lament for Heliodore (_Lang's Translation_)                        337

MICKLE, WILLIAM JULIUS.
  Cumnor Hall                                                         41

MILTON, JOHN.
  Lycidas                                                            446
  Samson on his Blindness (_Samson Agonistes_)                       158
  Sonnet: To Cyriack Skinner                                         220

MITCHELL, SILAS WEIR.
  Quaker Graveyard, The                                              278

MOIR, DAVID MACBETH.
  Rustic Lad's Lament in the Town, The                               131

MOORE, THOMAS.
  "Alas, how light a cause" (_The Light of the Harem_)                80
  "As slow our ship"                                                 106
  "Farewell!--but whenever"                                          116
  "Farewell to thee, Araby's daughter" (_Fire Worshippers_)          316
  Linda to Hafed (_Fire Worshippers_)                                  6

MOSS, THOMAS.
  Beggar, The                                                        189

MOTHERWELL, WILLIAM.
  Jeanie Morrison                                                    127
  "My heid is like to rend, Willie"                                   49

MUHLENBERG, WILLIAM AUGUSTUS.
  "I would not live alway"                                           392

MUNBY, ARTHUR JOSEPH.
  Apres                                                              355


NAIRNE, CAROLINA OLIPHANT, LADY.
  Land o' the Leal, The                                              379

NEELE, HENRY.
  "Moan, moan, ye dying gales"                                       152

NOEL, THOMAS.
  Pauper's Drive, The                                                202

NORTON, CAROLINE E.S. SHERIDAN (LADY STIRLING MAXWELL).
  King of Denmark's Ride, The                                        340
  "Love not"                                                           8


O'BRIEN, WILLIAM SMITH.
  Never Despair                                                      246

ORLEANS, CHARLES, DUKE OF.
  "The fairest thing in mortal eyes" (_Cary's Trans._)               356

O'SHAUGHNESSY, ARTHUR WILLIAM EDGAR.
  "Has summer come without the rose?"                                 54


PALMER, JOHN WILLIAMSON.
  For Charlie's Sake                                                 411

PATMORE, COVENTRY [KEARSEY DEIGHTON].
  Parting                                                             96

PIATT, SARAH MORGAN BRYAN.
  Term of Death, The                                                 261

PIERPONT, JOHN.
  My Child                                                           415

POE, EDGAR ALLAN.
  Annabel Lee                                                        312
  For Annie                                                          385

POLLEN, JOHN.
  Last Leaf, The (_Russian of Poushkin_)                             187

POPE, ALEXANDER.
  Parting of Hector and Andromache (_Greek of Homer_)                118

POUSHKIN, ALEKSANDER SERGYEVICH.
  Last Leaf, The (_Pollen's Translation_)                            187

PRESTON, ANNIE A.
  "The green grass under the snow"                                   442

PRESTON, HARRIET WATERS.
  Fidelity in Doubt (_French of Le Roux_)                             95

PRIEST, NANCY AMELIA WOODBURY.
  Over the River                                                     406

PRINGLE, THOMAS.
  Afar in the Desert                                                 222

PROCTER, ADELAIDE ANNE.
  Doubting Heart, A                                                  171

PROCTER, BRYAN WALLER (_Barry Cornwall_).
  Life                                                               251
  "Softly woo away her breath"                                       318


QUARLES, FRANCIS.
  Vanity of the World, The                                           153


RAMSAY, ALLAN.
  Lochaber no More                                                   105

RAYMOND, ROSSITER WORTHINGTON.
  "Blessed are They"                                                 425
  Christus Consolator                                                432

RITTER, MARY LOUISE.
  Perished                                                           169

ROGERS, ROBERT CAMERON.
  Shadow Rose, The                                                    53

ROSETTI, DANTE GABRIEL.
  Nevermore, The                                                      82


SANGSTER, MARGARET ELIZABETH MUNSON.
  "Are the children at home?"                                        288

SCOTT, FREDERICK GEORGE.
  Van Elsen                                                          361

SCOTT, SIR WALTER.
  Coronach (_Lady of the Lake_)                                      309
  Song                                                                31
  Song of the Young Highlander                                       101

SHAKESPEARE, WILLIAM.
  "Blow, blow, thou winter wind" (_As You Like It_)                  155
  Course of True Love, The (_Midsummer Night's Dream_)                 3
  Death of Death                                                     460
  Fall of Cardinal Wolsey, The (_Henry VIII._)                       161
  "Farewell! thou art too dear"                                      112
  "Fear no more the heat o' the sun" (_Gymbeline_)                   328
  Grief (_Hamlet_)                                                   348
  Love's Memory (_All's Well that ends Well_)                        140
  Soliloquy on Death (_Hamlet_)                                      252
  "Take, O, take those lips away"                                     71
  Unrequited Love (_Twelfth Night_)                                    9

SHELLEY, PERCY BYSSHE.
  Lament, A                                                          173
  "The sun is warm, the sky is clear"                                164

SHIRLEY, JAMES.
  Death the Leveler                                                  253

SIDNEY, SIR PHILIP.
  "With how sad steps" (_Astrophel and Stella_)                       13

SILL, EDWARD ROWLAND.
  Morning Thought, A                                                 267

SILLERY, CHARLES DOYNE.
  "She died in beauty"                                               319

SIMMIAS.
  Grave of Sophocles, The (_Hardinge's Translation_)                 269

SMITH, BELLE E.
  "If I should die to-night"                                         374

SOUTHWELL, ROBERT.
  "Times go by turns"                                                228

SPOFFORD, HARRIET ELIZABETH PRESCOTT.
  Nun and Harp, The                                                   93

STEVENSON, ROBERT LOUIS BALFOUR.
  In Memoriam F.A.S.                                                 428

STOWE, HARRIET BEECHER.
  Lines to the Memory of "Annie"                                     426
  "Only a year"                                                      418

STRANGFORD, LORD.
  Blighted Love (_Portuguese of Camoens_)                             81

STURM. JULIUS.
  I Hold Still (_Translation_)                                       243

SYMONS, ARTHUR.
  Portrait, To a                                                      34


TENNYSON, ALFRED, LORD.
  "Break, break, break"                                              358
  "Home they brought her warrior dead" (_Princess_)                  345
  Lady Clare Vere de Vere                                              4
  Locksley Hall                                                       17
  May Queen, The                                                     292
  "Oh that 'twere possible" (_Maud_)                                 331
  Selections from "In Memoriam"                                      340
  "Tears, idle tears"                                                142

THOMPSON, FRANCIS.
  Daisy                                                              130

TICHEBORNE, CHEDIOCK.
  Lines written in the Tower                                         159

TIMROD, HENRY.
  At Magnolia Cemetery                                               279

TROWBRIDGE, JOHN TOWNSEND.
  Dorothy in the Garret                                               89


UHLAND, LUDWIG.
  Passage, The (_Austin's Translation_)                              342

ULRICH, ANTON, DUKE OF BRUNSWICK.
  God's Sure Help in Sorrow (_Winkworth's Translation_)              236

VAUGHAN, HENRY.
  "Happy are the dead"                                               439
  "They are all gone"                                                403


WASTELL, SIMON.
  Man's Mortality                                                    255

WATSON, JOHN WHITTAKER.
  Beautiful Snow                                                     205

WHITMAN, WALT.
  "When lilacs last in the door-yard bloomed"                        362

WHITTIER, JOHN GREENLEAF.
  Absent Sailor, To her (_The Tent on the Beach_)                    124
  Angel of Patience, The                                             402
  Maud Muller                                                         35

WILLIS, NATHANIEL PARKER.
  Unseen Spirits                                                     204

WINKWORTH, CATHARINE.
  God's Sure Help in Sorrow (_German of Ulrich_)                     236
  Myself, To (_German of Flemming_)                                  218


ZANGWILL, ISRAEL.
  Blind                                                              461


ANONYMOUS.
  Absence                                                            141
  Fair Helen                                                         330
  Good Bye                                                            97
  Grief for the Dead                                                 408
  Guilty or Not Guilty                                               212
  Lady Ann Bothwell's Lament                                          47
  Lavender                                                           355
  Parting Lovers, The                                                104
  Peace                                                              437
  Saddest Fate, The                                                  247
  "They are dear fish to me"                                         195
  "Waly, waly"                                                        45
  Watching for Papa                                                  414
  Wife to her Husband, The                                           146